Schizophrenia was first identified  more than a century ago, but we still don’t know its exact causes. It remains one of the most misunderstood  and stigmatized illnesses today. So, let’s walk through what we do know—  from symptoms to causes and treatments. Schizophrenia is considered a syndrome, which means it may encompass  a number of related disorders that have similar symptoms  but varying causes. Every person with schizophrenia  has slightly different symptoms, and the first signs can be easy to miss—  subtle personality changes, irritability, or a gradual encroachment  of unusual thoughts. Patients are usually diagnosed  after the onset of psychosis, which typically occurs in the late teens  or early twenties for men and the late twenties  or early thirties for women. A first psychotic episode can feature  delusions, hallucinations, and disordered speech and behavior. These are called positive symptoms, meaning they occur  in people with schizophrenia but not in the general population. It’s a common misperception  that people with schizophrenia have multiple personalities, but these symptoms indicate a disruption  of thought processes, rather than the manifestation  of another personality. Schizophrenia also has negative symptoms, these are qualities that are reduced  in people with schizophrenia, such as motivation,  expression of emotion, or speech. There are cognitive symptoms as well,  like difficulty concentrating, remembering information,  and making decisions. So what causes the onset of psychosis? There likely isn’t one single cause, but a combination of genetic and environmental  risk factors that contribute. Schizophrenia has some of the strongest  genetic links of any psychiatric illness. Though about 1% of people  have schizophrenia, children or siblings of people  with schizophrenia are ten times likelier to develop the disease, and an identical twin  of someone with schizophrenia has a 40% chance of being affected. Often, immediate relatives  of people with schizophrenia exhibit milder versions of traits  associated with the disorder— but not to an extent  that requires treatment. Multiple genes almost certainly  play a role, but we don’t know how many, or which ones. Environmental factors like exposure  to certain viruses in early infancy might increase the chance  that someone will develop schizophrenia, and use of some drugs,  including marijuana, may trigger the onset of psychosis in highly susceptible individuals. These factors don’t affect  everyone the same way. For those with very low genetic risk, no amount of exposure  to environmental risk factors will lead them to develop schizophrenia; for those with very high risk, moderate  additional risk might tip the balance. The antipsychotic drugs used to treat  schizophrenia have helped researchers work backwards to trace signatures  of the disorder in the brain. Traditional antipsychotics  block dopamine receptors. They can be very effective  in reducing positive symptoms, which are linked to an excess of dopamine  in particular brain pathways. But the same drugs  can make negative symptoms worse, and we’ve found that negative symptoms  of schizophrenia may be tied to too little dopamine  in other brain areas. Some people with schizophrenia  show a loss of neural tissue, and it’s unclear whether this atrophy  is a result of the disease itself or drug-induced suppression of signaling. Fortunately, newer generations  of antipsychotics aim to address some of these issues by targeting  multiple neurotransmitters, like serotonin in addition to dopamine. It’s clear that no one transmitter system  is responsible for all symptoms, and because these drugs affect signaling  throughout the brain and body, they can have other  side effects like weight gain. In spite of these complications,  antipsychotics can be very effective, especially when combined  with other interventions like cognitive-behavioral therapy. Electroconvulsive therapy, though  it provides relatively short-lived relief, is also re-emerging  as an effective treatment, especially when other options  have failed. Early intervention  is also extremely important. After months or years  of untreated psychosis, certain psychoses can become embedded  in someone’s personality. And yet, the dehumanizing stigma  attached to this diagnosis can prevent people from seeking help. People with schizophrenia  are often perceived as dangerous, but are actually much more likely  to be the victims of violence than the perpetrators. And proper treatment may help reduce  the likelihood of violence associated with schizophrenia. That’s why education— for patients,  their families, and their communities— helps erode the stigma  and improves access to treatment. 