At this very moment, almost everything  around you is being eaten. Invisible to the naked eye, organisms  called microbes swarm every surface. Hordes of bacteria, archaea, and fungi  have evolved to produce powerful enzymes that break down tough organic material  into digestible nutrients. But there’s one particularly widespread  type of material that almost no microbes can biodegrade: plastics. To make most plastics, molecules  from oil, gas and coal are refined and turned into long, repeating chains  called polymers. This process often requires temperatures  above 100˚C, incredibly high pressure, and various chemical modifications. The resulting man-made polymers  are quite different from the polymers found in nature. And since they’ve only been  around since the 1950s, most microbes haven’t had time to evolve  enzymes to digest them. Making matters even more difficult, breaking most plastics’ chemical bonds  requires high temperatures comparable to those used to create them— and such heat is deadly to most microbes. This means that most plastics  never biologically degrade— they just turn into countless, tiny,  indigestible pieces. And pieces from the most common plastics  like Polyethylene, Polypropylene, and Polyester-terephthalate have been piling up for decades. Each year humanity produces roughly  400 million more tons of plastic, 80% of which is discarded as trash. Of that plastic waste,  only 10% is recycled. 60% gets incinerated  or goes into the landfills, and 30% leaks out into the environment where it will pollute natural ecosystems  for centuries. An estimated 10 million tons of plastic  waste end up in the ocean each year, mostly in the form of microplastic  fragments that pollute the food chain. Fortunately, there are microbes  that may be able to take a bite out of this  growing problem. In 2016, a team of Japanese researchers  sampling sludge at a plastic-bottle recycling plant  discovered Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6. This never-before-identified bacterium  contained two enzymes capable of slowly breaking  down PET polymers at relatively low temperatures. Researchers isolated the genes coding  for these plastic-digesting enzymes, allowing other bioengineers to combine  and improve the pair— creating super-enzymes that could break  down PET up to 6 times faster. Even with this boost, these lab-grown enzymes still took weeks  to degrade a thin film of PET, and they operated best at temperatures  below 40˚C. However, another group of scientists  in Japan had been researching bacterial enzymes adapted  to high temperature environments like compost piles. And within one particularly warm pile  of rotting leaves and branches, they found gene sequences  for powerful degrading enzymes known as Leaf Branch Compost Cutinases. Using fast-growing microorganisms, other researchers were able  to genetically engineer high quantities of these enzymes. They then enhanced and selected  special variants of the Cutinases that could degrade PET plastic  in environments reaching 70˚C— a high temperature that can weaken  PET polymers and make them digestible. With the help of these  and other tiny diehards, the future of PET recycling  looks promising. But PET is just one type of plastic. We still need ways to biologically degrade all the other types, including abundant PEs and PPs which only begin breaking down  at temperatures well above 130˚C. Researchers don’t currently know  of any microbes or enzymes tough enough to tolerate  such temperatures. So for now, the main way we deal  with these plastics is through energy-intensive physical  and chemical processes. Today only a small fraction  of plasticwaste can be biologically degraded by microbes. Researchers are looking for more  heat-tolerant plastivores in the planet’s most hostile environments and engineering better  plastivorous enzymes in the lab. But we can’t rely solely on these tiny  helpers to clean up our enormous mess. We need to completely rethink  our relationship with plastics, make better use of existing plastics, and stopproducing more of the same. And we urgently need to design more  environmentally friendly types of polymers that our growing entourage of plastivores  can easily break down. 