In 2009, two researchers ran  a simple experiment. They took everything we know  about our solar system and calculated where every planet would be up to 5 billion years in the future. To do so they ran over 2,000  numerical simulations with the same exact initial conditions except for one difference: the distance between Mercury and the Sun, modified by less than a millimeter from one simulation to the next. Shockingly, in about 1 percent  of their simulations, Mercury’s orbit changed so drastically  that it could plunge into the Sun or collide with Venus. Worse yet, in one simulation it destabilized the entire inner solar system. This was no error;  the astonishing variety in results reveals the truth that our solar system  may be much less stable than it seems. Astrophysicists refer to this astonishing property of gravitational systems as the n-body problem. While we have equations  that can completely predict the motions of two gravitating masses, our analytical tools fall short  when faced with more populated systems. It’s actually impossible to write down all the terms of a general formula that can exactly describe the motion of three or more gravitating objects. Why? The issue lies in how many unknown variables an n-body system contains. Thanks to Isaac Newton,  we can write a set of equations to describe the gravitational force  acting between bodies. However, when trying to find a general  solution for the unknown variables in these equations, we’re faced with  a mathematical constraint: for each unknown,  there must be at least one equation that independently describes it. Initially, a two-body system appears  to have more unknown variables for position and velocity  than equations of motion. However, there’s a trick: consider the relative position  and velocity of the two bodies with respect to the center  of gravity of the system. This reduces the number of unknowns and leaves us with a solvable system. With three or more orbiting objects  in the picture, everything gets messier. Even with the same mathematical trick  of considering relative motions, we’re left with more unknowns  than equations describing them. There are simply too many variables for this system of equations to be untangled into a general solution. But what does it actually look like  for objects in our universe to move according to analytically  unsolvable equations of motion? A system of three stars— like Alpha Centauri— could come crashing into one another or, more likely, some might get flung out of orbit  after a long time of apparent stability. Other than a few highly improbable  stable configurations, almost every possible case  is unpredictable on long timescales. Each has an astronomically large range of potential outcomes, dependent on the tiniest of differences in position and velocity. This behaviour is known  as chaotic by physicists, and is an important characteristic  of n-body systems. Such a system is still deterministic— meaning there’s nothing random about it. If multiple systems start  from the exact same conditions, they’ll always reach the same result. But give one a little shove at the start, and all bets are off. That’s clearly relevant  for human space missions, when complicated orbits need  to be calculated with great precision. Thankfully, continuous advancements in computer simulations offer a number of ways to avoid catastrophe. By approximating the solutions  with increasingly powerful processors, we can more confidently predict the motion of n-body systems on long time-scales. And if one body in a group  of three is so light it exerts no significant force  on the other two, the system behaves, with very good  approximation, as a two-body system. This approach is known  as the “restricted three-body problem.” It proves extremely useful  in describing, for example, an asteroid in the Earth-Sun  gravitational field, or a small planet in the field  of a black hole and a star. As for our solar system,  you’ll be happy to hear that we can have reasonable confidence in its stability for at least the next  several hundred million years. Though if another star, launched from across the galaxy,  is on its way to us, all bets are off. 