The year is 15 CE and the Roman Empire is prospering. Most of the credit will go to the emperor, but this success wouldn’t  have been possible without loyal soldiers like Servius Felix. Servius enlisted as a legionary  eight years ago at age 18, the son of a poor farmer with few prospects. Unlike the majority of legionaries, he doesn’t gamble, so he’s been able to save  most of his wages. He’s even kept his viaticum, the three gold coins he received  when he enlisted. If he survives until retirement,  he’ll receive several acres of land. And he’s grown rather fond  of a girl back home whom he intends to marry. But he’ll have to wait until he completes  his 25 years of service before that can happen. And the life of a legionary  is dangerous and grueling. Today, Servius’s legion,  along with three others, has undertaken a “great march”  of 30,000 Roman paces, the equivalent of nearly 36 kilometers. Servius’s armor and weapons, including his gladius, scutum, and two pila, weigh over 20 kilograms. And that’s not counting his backpack,  or sarcina, which contains food and all the tools he needs to help build the camp – spade, saw, pickaxe, and basket. Although Servius is exhausted,  he won’t sleep much tonight. He’s been assigned the first watch, which means looking after  the baggage animals and keeping alert against a possible ambush. After he’s done, he lies awake,  dreading the day ahead, which will force him  to recall his worst nightmare. At dawn, Servius eats breakfast  with his seven tent companions. They’re like a family, all bearing scars  from the battles they’ve fought together. Servius is from Italia, but his fellow soldiers hail  from all over the empire, which stretches from Syria to Spain. So they’re all far from home  in the northern land of Germania. Servius’s legion  and three others with him today are under the command of Emperor Tiberius’s nephew Germanicus, named for his father’s military successes against the Germanic tribes. Each legion has close to 5,000 men, divided into cohorts of about 500, further subdivided into centuries  of around 80-100 men. Each century is commanded by a centurion. An aquilifer, or eagle-bearer, marches at the head of each legion carrying its eagle standard. The centurions march beside  the legionaries belting out orders, “Dex, sin, dex, sin," “Right, left, right, left," starting with the right foot as the left  is considered unlucky or sinister. Despite the strict discipline,  there’s tension in the air. Last year, some legions  in the area revolted, demanding better pay  and a cut in the length of service. Only their general’s charisma and negotiating skills prevented wholesale mutiny. Today is a “just march,”  only 30 kilometers. As the marshes and forests of Germania  lie beyond the empire’s road system the men must build causeways and bridges to make headway— something they’ve recently spent  more time doing than fighting. Finally, they arrive at their destination, a place Servius knows too well. It’s a clearing on the outskirts  of the Teutoburg Forest, where six years ago, during the reign of the Emperor Augustus, Germanic tribes under  their chieftain Arminius ambushed and destroyed three legions. Proceeding along a narrow path, the legions were attacked from  forest cover under torrential rain with their escape blocked. It was one of the worst defeats  the Romans ever suffered and Augustus never lived it down. Servius was one of the few survivors. Servius still has nightmares of  his comrades lying where they fell. But now the army is back to bury  the dead with full military honors. As he helps in the task, he can’t help wondering whether the bones he handles belonged to someone he knew. Several times he wants to weep aloud,  but he pushes on with the task. The glory of the Empire  can go to the crows. All he craves is to retire  on a small farm with his wife-to-be, if the gods should spare his life  for 17 more years. 