At any given moment, trillions of cells  are traveling through your blood vessels, sometimes circling the body  in just one minute. Each of these cells  has its origins deep in your bones. Bones might seem rock-solid,  but they’re actually quite porous inside. Large and small blood vessels  enter through these holes. And inside most of the large bones  of your skeleton is a hollow core filled with soft bone marrow. Marrow contains fat  and other supportive tissue, but its most essential elements  are blood stem cells. These stem cells are constantly dividing. They can differentiate  into red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets, and send about hundreds of billions  of new blood cells into circulation every day. These new cells enter the bloodstream through holes  in small capillaries in the marrow. Through the capillaries, they reach larger blood vessels  and exit the bone. If there’s a problem with your blood, there’s a good chance  it can be traced back to the bone marrow. Blood cancers often begin  with genetic mutations in the stem cells. The stem cells themselves  are not cancerous, but these mutations can interfere  with the process of differentiation and result in malignant blood cells. So for patients with advanced  blood cancers like leukemia and lymphoma, the best chance for a cure is often  an allogeneic bone marrow transplant, which replaces the patient’s bone marrow  with a donor’s. Here’s how it works. First, blood stem cells  are extracted from the donor. Most commonly, blood stem cells are filtered out  of the donor’s bloodstream by circulating the blood  through a machine that separates it  into different components. In other cases,  the marrow is extracted directly from a bone in the hip, the iliac crest,  with a needle. Meanwhile, the recipient  prepares for the transplant. High doses of chemotherapy or radiation  kill the patient’s existing marrow, destroying both malignant cells  and blood stem cells. This also weakens the immune system, making it less likely  to attack the transplanted cells. Then the donor cells are infused into  the patient’s body through a central line. They initially circulate  in the recipient’s peripheral bloodstream, but molecules on the stem cells,  called chemokines, act as homing devices and quickly traffic them  back to the marrow. Over the course of a few weeks, they begin to multiply and start producing new, healthy blood cells. Just a small population  of blood stem cells can regenerate a whole body’s  worth of healthy marrow. A bone marrow transplant  can also lead to something called graft-versus-tumor activity, when new immune cells  generated by the donated marrow can wipe out cancer cells the recipient’s  original immune system couldn’t. This phenomenon can help eradicate  stubborn blood cancers. But bone marrow transplants  also come with risks, including graft-versus-host disease. It happens when the immune system  generated by the donor cells attacks the patient’s organs. This life-threatening condition  occurs in about 30–50% of patients who receive donor cells  from anyone other than an identical twin, particularly when the stem cells  are collected from the blood  as opposed to the bone marrow. Patients may take  immunosuppressant medications or certain immune cells may be removed  from the donated sample in order to reduce the risk  of graft-versus-host disease. But even if a patient  avoids graft-versus-host disease, their immune system  may reject the donor cells. So it’s crucial to find the best match  possible in the first place. Key regions of the genetic code  determine how the immune system identifies foreign cells. If these regions are similar  in the donor and the recipient, the recipient’s immune system  is more likely to accept the donor cells. Because these genes are inherited,  the best matches are often siblings. But many patients  who need a bone marrow transplant don’t have a matched family member. Those patients  turn to donor registries of volunteers willing to offer their bone marrow. All it takes to be on the registry is  a cheek swab to test for a genetic match. And in many cases,  the donation itself isn’t much more complicated  than giving blood. It’s a way to save someone’s life with a resource  that’s completely renewable. 