Even after writing eleven books  and winning several prestigious awards, Maya Angelou couldn’t escape  the nagging doubt that she hadn’t really earned  her accomplishments. Albert Einstein experienced  something similar: he described himself  as an “involuntary swindler” whose work didn’t deserve  as much attention as it had received. Accomplishments at the level  of Angelou’s or Einstein’s are rare, but their feeling of fraudulence  is extremely common. Why can’t so many of us shake feelings that we haven’t earned  our accomplishments, or that our ideas and skills  aren’t worthy of others’ attention? Psychologist Pauline Rose Clance  was the first to study this unwarranted sense of insecurity. In her work as a therapist, she noticed many of her undergraduate  patients shared a concern: though they had high grades, they didn’t believe they deserved  their spots at the university. Some even believed their acceptance  had been an admissions error. While Clance knew these fears  were unfounded, she could also remember feeling the exact same way in graduate school. She and her patients experienced something that goes by a number of names-- imposter phenomenon, imposter experience, and imposter syndrome. Together with colleague Suzanne Imes, Clance first studied imposterism in female college students and faculty. Their work established pervasive feelings of fraudulence in this group. Since that first study, the same thing has been established  across gender, race, age, and a huge range of occupations, though it may be more prevalent  and disproportionately affect the experiences of underrepresented  or disadvantaged groups. To call it a syndrome  is to downplay how universal it is. It's not a disease or an abnormality, and it isn’t necessarily  tied to depression, anxiety, or self-esteem. Where do these feelings  of fraudulence come from? People who are highly skilled  or accomplished tend to think others are just as skilled. This can spiral into feelings  that they don’t deserve accolades and opportunities over other people. And as Angelou and Einstein experienced, there’s often no threshold  of accomplishment that puts these feelings to rest. Feelings of imposterism aren’t restricted  to highly skilled individuals, either. Everyone is susceptible to a phenomenon  known as pluralistic ignorance, where we each doubt ourselves privately, but believe we’re alone  in thinking that way because no one else voices their doubts. Since it’s tough to really know  how hard our peers work, how difficult they find certain tasks, or how much they doubt themselves, there’s no easy way to dismiss feelings  that we’re less capable than the people around us. Intense feelings of imposterism can prevent people  from sharing their great ideas or applying for jobs  and programs where they’d excel. At least so far, the most surefire way  to combat imposter syndrome is to talk about it. Many people suffering  from imposter syndrome are afraid that if they ask  about their performance, their fears will be confirmed. And even when  they receive positive feedback, it often fails to ease  feelings of fraudulence. But on the other hand, hearing that an advisor or mentor has experienced feelings of imposterism can help relieve those feelings. The same goes for peers. Even simply finding out there’s a term  for these feelings can be an incredible relief. Once you’re aware of the phenomenon, you can combat your own imposter syndrome  by collecting  and revisiting positive feedback. One scientist who kept blaming herself  for problems in her lab started to document the causes  every time something went wrong. Eventually, she realized most  of the problems came from equipment failure, and came to recognize her own competence. We may never be able  to banish these feelings entirely, but we can have open conversations  about academic or professional challenges. With increasing awareness  of how common these experiences are, perhaps we can feel freer to be frank  about our feelings and build confidence  in some simple truths: you have talent, you are capable, and you belong. 