Arriving home after a long day, you settle in for a quiet evening alone. But instead of the sound of silence,  you hear a constant ringing— even though there’s nothing  making any noise. What you’re experiencing  is called tinnitus, the perception of a noise like ringing,  buzzing, hissing or clicking that occurs without any external source  of sound. Tinnitus has been bothering humanity  since Ancient Babylon, plaguing everyone from Leonardo da Vinci  to Charles Darwin. Today, roughly one in seven people  worldwide experiences this auditory sensation. So where does this persistent sound  come from? When you normally hear something,  sound waves hit various areas of your ear, creating vibrations that displace fluid  inside the cochlea. If the vibrations are large enough, they elicit a chemical response  that transforms them into bioelectrical signals. These nerve impulses are then relayed  through the hearing pathway to the brain, where they result  in the sounds we perceive. However, in the vast majority  of tinnitus cases, the nerve signals that produce  these mysterious sounds don’t travel through your ear at all. Instead, they’re generated internally,  by your own central nervous system. Under usual circumstances,  these self-produced signals are an essential part of hearing. All mammals demonstrate  on-going neural activity throughout their hearing pathways. When there are no sounds present, this activity is at a baseline  that establishes your neural code for silence. When a sound does appear,  this activity changes, allowing the brain to distinguish  between silence and sound. But the auditory system’s health  can affect this background signal. Loud noises, diseases, toxins,  and even natural aging can damage your cochlear cells. Some of these may heal  in a matter of hours. However, if enough cells die,  either over time or all at once, the auditory system becomes  less sensitive. With fewer cochlear cells  relaying information, incoming sounds generate  weaker nerve signals. And many environmental sounds  can be lost completely. To compensate, your brain devotes more  energy to monitoring the hearing pathway. Just like you might adjust  the knobs of a radio, the brain modifies neural activity  while also tweaking the tuning knob to get a clearer signal. Increasing this background neural activity is intended to help you process weak auditory inputs. But it can also modify  your baseline for silence— such that a lack of sound  no longer sounds silent at all. This is called subjective tinnitus, and it accounts for the vast majority  of tinnitus cases. Subjective tinnitus  is a symptom associated with practically every known ear disorder, but it isn’t necessarily a bad thing. While its appearance can be surprising, subjective tinnitus has no inherently  negative consequences. But for some, tinnitus episodes  can trigger traumatic memories or otherwise distressing feelings, which increase the sound’s intrusiveness. This psychological loop often leads  to what’s known as “bothersome tinnitus," a condition that can exacerbate  the symptoms of PTSD, insomnia, anxiety, and depression. There’s no known cure  for subjective tinnitus. So the most important thing  doctors can do is help people understand  this auditory event, and develop neutral associations  with these often-distressing sounds. For example, sound therapy uses noises  like rain, birdsong, or music to mask tinnitus and reduce stress. One form, called informational masking,  uses soothing, complex auditory signals that distract the brain  from the tinnitus sound. Another, called energetic masking, uses sounds with the same frequency  as the patient’s tinnitus to occupy the neurons that would  otherwise deliver the tinnitus signal. Practiced alongside counseling, these interventions allow  people to re-evaluate their relationship with tinnitus. Losing the sound of silence  can be troubling to say the least. Tinnitus reveals that your brain is  constantly analyzing the world around you, even as it fails to filter  its own internal noise. In a sense, experiencing tinnitus is like eavesdropping  on your brain talking to itself— though it may not be a conversation  you want to hear. 