In 1958, Rachel Carson received a letter describing songbirds suddenly dropping  from tree branches. The writer blamed their deaths  on a pesticide called DDT that exterminators had sprayed  on a nearby marsh. The letter was the push  Carson needed to investigate DDT. She had already heard from scientists  and conservationists who were worried that rampant use of the pesticide  posed a threat to fish, birds, and possibly humans. She began to make inquiries  through government contacts from her years working  in the United States Bureau of Fisheries. She asked: “what has already silenced  the voices of spring?” In 1962, Carson published her findings  in "Silent Spring." Her book documented  the misuse of chemicals and their toll on nature  and human health. "Silent Spring" immediately drew both  applause and impassioned dissent— along with vicious personal attacks  on the author. How did this mild-mannered biologist  and writer ignite such controversy? Carson began her career  as a hardworking graduate student, balancing her studies in biology  at John Hopkins University with part time jobs. Still, she had to leave school  before completing her doctorate to provide for her ailing father  and sister. Carson found part time work  with the Bureau of Fisheries writing for a radio program  on marine biology. Her ability to write materials that could  hold the general public’s attention impressed her superiors,  and in 1936, she became the second woman  to be hired at the Bureau full time. In 1941, she published  the first of three books on the ocean, combining science with lyrical meditations on underwater worlds. These explorations resonated  with a wide audience. In "Silent Spring,"  Carson turned her attention to the ways human actions  threaten the balance of nature. DDT was originally used during  World War II to shield crops from insects and protect soldiers  from insect-borne diseases. After the war, it was routinely sprayed  in wide swaths to fight pests, often with unforeseen results. One attempt to eradicate fire ants  in the southern U.S. killed wildlife indiscriminately, but did little to eliminate the ants. In spite of this and other mishaps,  the US Department of Agriculture and chemical companies  extolled the benefits of DDT. There was little regulation or public  awareness about its potential harm. But Carson showed how  the overuse of chemicals led to the evolution  of resistant species— which, in turn, encouraged the development of deadlier chemicals. Since DDT does not dissolve in water, she asserted that over time  it would accumulate in the environment, the bodies of insects, the tissues  of animals who consume those insects, and eventually humans. She suggested that exposure to DDT  might alter the structure of genes, with unknown consequences  for future generations. The response to "Silent Spring"  was explosive. For many people the book  was a call to regulate substances capable of catastrophic harm. Others objected that Carson  hadn’t mentioned DDT’s role controlling the threat insects  posed to human health. Former Secretary of Agriculture  Ezra Taft Benson demanded to know “why a spinster with no children  was so concerned about genetics?” and dismissed Carson  as “probably a Communist.” A lawyer for a pesticide manufacturer  alluded to Carson and her supporters as “sinister influences”  aiming to paint businesses as “immoral.” In reality, Carson had focused  on the dangers of chemicals because they weren’t widely understood,  while the merits were well publicized. She rejected the prevailing belief  that humans should and could control nature. Instead, she challenged people  to cultivate “maturity and mastery, not of nature,  but of ourselves.” Carson died of cancer in 1964, only two years after  the publication of "Silent Spring." Her work galvanized a generation  of environmental activists. In 1969, under pressure  from environmentalists, Congress passed  the National Environmental Policy Act that required federal agencies to evaluate environmental impacts of their actions. To enforce the act, President Richard Nixon created  the Environmental Protection Agency. And in 1972, the EPA issued  a partial ban on the use of DDT. Long after her death, Rachel Carson  continued to advocate for nature through the lingering impact  of her writing. 