This chimpanzee stumbles  across a windfall of overripe plums. Many of them have split open, drawing him  to their intoxicating fruity odor. He gorges himself and begins to experience some…  strange effects. This unwitting ape  has stumbled on a process that humans will eventually harness to create  beer, wine, and other alcoholic drinks. The sugars in overripe fruit  attract microscopic organisms known as yeasts. As the yeasts feed on the fruit sugars  they produce a compound called ethanol— the type of alcohol  in alcoholic beverages. This process is called fermentation. Nobody knows exactly when humans began  to create fermented beverages. The earliest known evidence  comes from 7,000 BCE in China, where residue in clay pots has revealed that people  were making an alcoholic beverage from fermented rice, millet,  grapes, and honey. Within a few thousand years, cultures all over the world  were fermenting their own drinks. Ancient Mesopotamians and Egyptians  made beer throughout the year from stored cereal grains. This beer  was available to all social classes, and workers  even received it in their daily rations. They also made wine, but because the climate  wasn’t ideal for growing grapes, it was a rare and expensive delicacy. By contrast, in Greece and Rome,  where grapes grew more easily, wine was as readily available  as beer was in Egypt and Mesopotamia. Because yeasts  will ferment basically any plant sugars, ancient peoples made alcohol from whatever crops and plants  grew where they lived. In South America,  people made chicha from grains, sometimes adding hallucinogenic herbs. In what’s now Mexico,  pulque, made from cactus sap, was the drink of choice, while East Africans  made banana and palm beer. And in the area that’s now Japan,  people made sake from rice. Almost every region of the globe  had its own fermented drinks. As alcohol consumption  became part of everyday life, some authorities latched onto effects  they perceived as positive— Greek physicians  considered wine to be good for health, and poets  testified to its creative qualities. Others were more concerned  about alcohol’s potential for abuse. Greek philosophers promoted temperance. Early Jewish and Christian writers  in Europe integrated wine into rituals but considered excessive intoxication  a sin. And in the middle east,  Africa, and Spain, an Islamic rule  against praying while drunk gradually solidified  into a general ban on alcohol. Ancient fermented beverages  had relatively low alcohol content. At about 13% alcohol, the by-products wild yeasts  generate during fermentation become toxic and kill them. When the yeasts die, fermentation stops  and the alcohol content levels off. So for thousands of years,  alcohol content was limited. That changed  with the invention of a process called distillation. 9th century Arabic writings  describe boiling fermented liquids to vaporize the alcohol in them. Alcohol boils  at a lower temperature than water, so it vaporizes first. Capture this vapor, cool it down,  and what’s left is liquid alcohol much more concentrated  than any fermented beverage. At first, these stronger spirits  were used for medicinal purposes. Then, spirits became  an important trade commodity because, unlike beer and wine,  they didn’t spoil. Rum made from sugar harvested in European colonies  in the Caribbean became a staple for sailors and was traded to North America. Europeans brought  brandy and gin to Africa and traded it  for enslaved people, land, and goods like palm oil and rubber. Spirits became  a form of money in these regions. During the Age of Exploration, spirits played a crucial role  in long distance sea voyages. Sailing from Europe to east Asia  and the Americas could take months, and keeping water fresh  for the crews was a challenge. Adding a bucket of brandy  to a water barrel kept water fresh longer because alcohol is a preservative  that kills harmful microbes. So by the 1600s, alcohol had gone from  simply giving animals a buzz to fueling global trade and exploration—  along with all their consequences. As time went on, its role in human society  would only get more complicated. 