Working in Vienna at the turn  of the 20th century, he began his career as a neurologist before pioneering the discipline  of psychoanalysis. He proposed that people are motivated  by unconscious desires and repressed memories, and their problems can be addressed by making those motivations conscious  through talk therapy. His influence towers above that of all  other psychologists in the public eye. But was Sigmund Freud  right about human nature? And were his methods scientific? Order, order.  Today on the stand we have… Dad? Ahem, no, your honor. This is Doctor Sigmund Freud, one of the most innovative thinkers in the history of psychology. An egomaniac who propagated  pseudoscientific theories. Well, which is it? He tackled issues medicine  refused to address. Freud’s private practice treated women who suffered from what was called  hysteria at the time, and their complaints hadn’t been taken seriously at all. From the women with depression  he treated initially to World War I veterans with PTSD, Freud’s talking cure worked, and the visibility he gave his patients  forced the medical establishment to acknowledge their psychological  disorders were real. He certainly didn’t help all his patients. Freud was convinced that our behavior is shaped by unconscious urges  and repressed memories. He invented baseless unconscious  or irrational drivers behind the behavior of trauma  survivors— and caused real harm. How’s that? He misrepresented some of his most  famous case studies, claiming his treatment had cured patients  when in fact they had gotten worse. Later therapists influenced  by his theories coaxed their patients into "recovering" supposedly repressed memories  of childhood abuse that never happened. Lives and families were torn apart. You can’t blame Freud for later misapplications of his work— that would be projecting. Plenty of his ideas were harmful  without any misapplication. He viewed homosexuality  as a developmental glitch. He coined the term penis envy— meaning women are haunted for life by their lack of penises. Freud was a product of his era. Yes, some of the specifics were flawed, but he created a new space  for future scientists to explore, investigate, and build upon. Modern therapy techniques that millions of people rely on came out of the work he started  with psychoanalysis. And today everyone knows  there’s an unconscious— that idea was popularized Freud. Psychologists today only believe  in a “cognitive unconscious,” the fact that you aren’t aware  of everything going on at a given moment. Freud took this idea way too far,  ascribing deep meaning to everything. He built his theories on scientific ideas that were outdated even in his own time, not just by today’s standards— for example, he thought  individual psychology is derived from the biological inheritance of events in ancient history. And I mean ancient—  like the Ice Age or the killing of Moses. Freud and his closest allies actually  believed these prehistorical traumas had ongoing impacts on human psychology. He thought that the phase  of cold indifference to sexuality during pubescence was literally  an echo of the Ice Age. With fantastical beliefs like these, how can we take him seriously? Any renowned thinker from centuries past has ideas that seem fantastical  by today’s standards, but we can’t discount  their influence on this basis. Freud was an innovator  linking ideas across many fields. His concepts have become everyday terms that shape how we understand and talk  about our own experiences. The Oedipus complex? Ego and id?  Defense mechanisms? Death wishes? All Freud. But Freud didn’t present himself as a  social theorist— he insisted that his work was scientific. Are you saying he… repressed inconvenient facts? Freud’s theories were unfalsifiable. Wait, so you’re saying he was right? No, his ideas were framed so that  there’s no way to empirically verify them. Freud didn’t even necessarily believe  in the psychoanalysis he was peddling. He was pessimistic  about the impact of therapy. What! I think I need to lie down! Many of Sigmund Freud’s ideas  don’t hold up to modern science, and his clinical practices don’t meet  today’s ethical standards. At the same time, he sparked  a revolution in psychology and society, and created a vocabulary  for discussing emotion. Freud made his share of mistakes. But is a thinker responsible  for how subsequent generations put their ideas to use? Do they deserve the blame,  credit, or redemption when we put history on trial? 