From sailors who were turned into pigs, nymphs that sprouted into trees, and a gaze that converted  the beholder to stone, Greek mythology brims with shape-shifters. The powerful gods usually changed  their own forms at will, but for mortals, the mutations  were often unwanted. One such unnerving transformation  befell the spinner Arachne. Arachne was the daughter  of a tradesman who spent his days dying cloth  the deepest shades of purple. She had a flair for spinning  the finest threads, weaving them into flowing fabric, and creating magnificent tapestries. People flocked to watch her hands  flying across her loom, as if thread sprung directly  from her fingertips. But as praise for her work grew,  so did her pride. Arachne could often be heard  boasting about her skills, declaring that her talent surpassed  anyone else’s—mortal or divine. She refused to see weaving  as a gift from the gods. Rather, she flaunted it  as her own personal genius. Unfortunately, the goddess of wisdom  and crafts, Athena, overheard Arachne  making these claims. Planning to teach  the ungrateful girl a lesson, Athena disguised herself as an old woman and stole amongst the mortals. She berated Arachne in public— how dare the weaver claim herself greater than the gods? But Arachne only laughed,  barely looking up from her loom. Provoked, the old woman threw off her cloak to reveal her true form. If Arachne insisted on defaming the gods, Athena would challenge her  to a contest directly. Masking her shock at the appearance  of the grey-eyed goddess, Arachne accepted the challenge. Athena drew up her own glittering loom  as a great crowd gathered to watch. The weavers began,  eyes fixed and shuttles blurring. Athena conjured  wisps of cloud from above and slender threads of grass  from below in a spectacle of strength. She wove tremendous scenes  that showed the power of the gods: Poseidon riding the waves, Zeus firing thunderbolts, and Apollo hurtling across the sky. In Athena’s splendid tapestry,  the glory of the gods dwarfed mortal life. But Arachne had no interest  in boosting godly egos. Her tapestry showed the gods abusing their power: squabbling amongst themselves, drinking and bragging, and meddling in the lives of mortals. She represented Zeus as a philanderer, transfiguring himself to ensnare women: a swan for Leda, a bull for Europa, a shower of gold for Danae. Arachne then turned to the misdemeanors of other gods, from Pluto’s abduction of Persephone to Bacchus’s wild pursuit of Erigone. Even though she cast the gods  in the most unflattering light, Arachne’s work shone  with her dazzling skill. Her tapestry was almost alive, filled with movement  and lustrous colors that winked triumphantly. When Athena saw Arachne's undeniably better and flagrantly subversive work, she flew into a rage  and turned on the human weaver. Arachne’s glee dimmed as she felt her body shrinking and contorting. Her fingers waved wildly  as her arms stuck to her sides, and black hair sprouted all over her body. The goddess left Arachne with a single  spool of thread unfurling from her belly, a slim reminder of her human talent. For challenging the assumption that the gods were untouchable, Athena had shrunk her adversary  into the first spider. To this day, Arachne and her children spin out her penance— or is it undaunted persistence?— in the shadows of giants. 