You hear the gentle lap of waves, the distant cawing of a seagull. But then an annoying whine interrupts the peace, getting closer, and closer, and closer. Until...whack! You dispatch the offending mosquito,  and calm is restored. How did you detect that noise from afar and target its maker with such precision? The ability to recognize sounds  and identify their location is possible thanks to the auditory system. That’s comprised of two main parts:  the ear and the brain. The ear’s task is to convert sound energy into neural signals; the brain’s is to receive and process  the information those signals contain. To understand how that works, we can follow a sound  on its journey into the ear. The source of a sound creates vibrations that travel as waves of pressure  through particles in air, liquids, or solids. But our inner ear, called the cochlea, is actually filled  with saltwater-like fluids. So, the first problem to solve  is how to convert those sound waves, wherever they’re coming from, into waves in the fluid. The solution is the eardrum,  or tympanic membrane, and the tiny bones of the middle ear. Those convert the large movements  of the eardrum into pressure waves  in the fluid of the cochlea. When sound enters the ear canal, it hits the eardrum and makes it vibrate  like the head of a drum. The vibrating eardrum jerks a bone  called the hammer, which hits the anvil and moves the third bone called the stapes. Its motion pushes the fluid  within the long chambers of the cochlea. Once there, the sound vibrations have finally been converted into vibrations of a fluid, and they travel like a wave  from one end of the cochlea to the other. A surface called the basilar membrane  runs the length of the cochlea. It’s lined with hair cells that have  specialized components called stereocilia, which move with the vibrations of the cochlear fluid and the basilar membrane. This movement triggers a signal  that travels through the hair cell, into the auditory nerve, then onward to the brain,  which interprets it as a specific sound. When a sound makes  the basilar membrane vibrate, not every hair cell moves - only selected ones,  depending on the frequency of the sound. This comes down to some fine engineering. At one end,  the basilar membrane is stiff, vibrating only in response to short wavelength, high-frequency sounds. The other is more flexible, vibrating only in the presence of longer wavelength, low-frequency sounds. So, the noises made by the seagull  and mosquito vibrate different locations  on the basilar membrane, like playing different keys on a piano. But that’s not all that’s going on. The brain still has another  important task to fulfill: identifying where a sound is coming from. For that, it compares the sounds  coming into the two ears to locate the source in space. A sound from directly in front of you will reach both your ears at the same time. You’ll also hear it at the same intensity  in each ear. However, a low-frequency sound  coming from one side will reach the near ear microseconds  before the far one. And high-frequency sounds will sound more intense to the near ear because they’re blocked  from the far ear by your head. These strands of information  reach special parts of the brainstem that analyze time and intensity differences between your ears. They send the results of their  analysis up to the auditory cortex. Now, the brain has  all the information it needs: the patterns of activity  that tell us what the sound is, and information about  where it is in space. Not everyone has normal hearing. Hearing loss is the third most common  chronic disease in the world. Exposure to loud noises  and some drugs can kill hair cells, preventing signals from traveling  from the ear to the brain. Diseases like osteosclerosis freeze  the tiny bones in the ear so they no longer vibrate. And with tinnitus, the brain does strange things to make us think there’s a sound  when there isn’t one. But when it does work, our hearing is an incredible,  elegant system. Our ears enclose a fine-tuned piece  of biological machinery that converts the cacophony of vibrations  in the air around us into precisely tuned electrical impulses that distinguish claps, taps,  sighs, and flies. 