We typically think of ballet  as harmonious, graceful and polished– hardly features that would trigger a riot. But at the first performance  of Igor Stravinsky’s "The Rite of Spring," audience members were so outraged  that they drowned out the orchestra. Accounts of the event include  people hurling objects at the stage, challenging each other to fights,  and getting arrested– all on what started  as a sophisticated night at the ballet. First performed in May 1913 at the Théâtre des Champs-Elysées  in Paris, "The Rite of Spring"  is set in prehistoric times. The narrative follows  an ancient Pagan community worshipping the Earth  and preparing for the sacrifice of a woman intended to bring about  the change of seasons. But the ballet is much more  concerned with the violent relationship between humans, nature, and culture than with character or plot. These themes manifest  in a truly upsetting production which combines harsh music,  jerky dancing, and uncanny staging. It opens with dancers  awakening to a solo bassoon, playing in an eerily high register. This gives way to discordant strings,  punctured by unexpected pauses while the dancers twitch to the music. These frightening figures  enact the ballet’s brutal premise, which set audiences on edge and shattered the conventions  of classical music. In these ways and many more, "The Rite of Spring"  challenged the orchestral traditions of the 19th century. Composed on the cusp  of both the first World War and the Russian revolution, "The Rite of Spring" seethes with urgency. This tension is reflected  in various formal experiments, including innovative uses of syncopation,  or irregular rhythm; atonality or the lack of a single key, and the presence  of multiple time signatures. Alongside these  strikingly modern features, Stravinsky spliced in aspects  of Russian folk music– a combination that deliberately disrupted the expectations of his sophisticated,  urban audience. This wasn’t Stravinsky’s  first use of folk music. Born in a small town  outside of St. Petersburg in 1882, Stravinsky’s reputation was cemented  with the lush ballet "The Firebird." Based on a Russian fairytale, this production  was steeped in Stravinsky’s fascination with folk culture. But he plotted a wilder project  in "The Rite of Spring," pushing folk and musical boundaries  to draw out the rawness of pagan ritual. Stravinsky brought this reverie to life in collaboration  with artist Nicholas Roerich. Roerich was obsessed  with prehistoric times. He had published essays  about human sacrifice and worked on excavations  of Slavic tombs in addition to set and costume design. For "The Rite of Spring,"  he drew from Russian medieval art and peasant garments to create costumes  that hung awkwardly on the dancers’ bodies. Roerich set them against vivid backdrops  of primeval nature; full of jagged rocks, looming trees  and nightmarish colors. Along with its dazzling sets  and searing score, the original choreography  for "The Rite of Spring" was highly provocative. This was the doing  of legendary dancer Vaslav Nijinsky, who developed dances  to rethink “the roots of movement itself.” Although Stravinsky  later expressed frustration with Nijinsky’s demanding rehearsals and single-minded interpretations  of the music, his choreography proved  as pioneering as Stravinsky’s composition. He contorted traditional ballet– to both the awe and horror  of his audience, many of whom expected  the refinement and romance of the genre. The dancing in "The Rite of Spring"  is agitated and uneven, with performers cowering, writhing  and leaping about as if possessed. Often, the dancers are not one  with the music but rather seem to struggle against it. Nijinsky instructed them  to turn their toes inwards and land heavily after jumps, often off the beat. For the final, frenzied scene, a woman dances herself to death  to loud bangs and jarring strings. The ballet ends abruptly on a harsh,  haunting chord. Today, "The Rite of Spring" remains as chilling  as its controversial debut, but the shockwaves of the original work continue to resound and inspire. You can hear Stravinsky’s influence  in modern jazz’s dueling rhythms, folky classical music,  and even film scores for horror movies, which still illicit  a riotous audience response. 