On August 28th, 1963, Martin Luther King Jr. delivered  his “I Have a Dream” speech at the March on Washington for  Jobs and Freedom. That day, nearly a quarter million people gathered on the national mall to demand an end to the discrimination, segregation, violence, and economic exclusion  black people still faced across the United States. None of it would have been possible  without the march’s chief organizer – a man named Bayard Rustin. Rustin grew up in a Quaker household, and began peacefully protesting racial segregation in high school. He remained committed to  pacifism throughout his life, and was jailed in 1944 as a conscientious  objector to World War II. During his two-year imprisonment, he protested the segregated  facilities from within. Wherever Rustin went, he organized and advocated,  and was constantly attuned to the  methods, groups, and people who could help further  messages of equality. He joined the Communist Party when black American’s civil rights  were one of its priorities, but soon became disillusioned by the  party’s authoritarian leanings and left. In 1948, he traveled to India to learn the  peaceful resistance strategies of the recently assassinated  Mahatma Gandhi. He returned to the United States armed with strategies  for peaceful protest, including civil disobedience. He began to work with  Martin Luther King Jr in 1955, and shared these ideas with him. As King’s prominence increased, Rustin became his main advisor, as well as a key strategist in the  broader civil rights movement. He brought his organizing expertise  to the 1956 bus boycotts  in Montgomery, Alabama —in fact, he had organized and participated  in a transportation protest that helped inspire the boycotts  almost a decade before. His largest-scale organizing project  came in 1963, when he led the planning for the  national march on Washington. The possibility of riots that could  injure marchers and undermine their message of peaceful  protest was a huge concern. Rustin not only worked with the DC  police and hospitals to prepare, but organized and trained a volunteer  force of 2,000 security marshals. In spite of his deft management, some of the other organizers did  not want Rustin to march in front with other leaders from the south,  because of his homosexuality. Despite these slights, Rustin maintained his focus, and on the day of the march he delivered the marchers' demands in a speech directed at  President John F. Kennedy. The march itself proceeded smoothly, without any violence. It has been credited with helping pass  the 1964 Civil Rights Act, which ended segregation in public places  and banned employment discrimination, and the 1965 Voting Rights Act, which outlawed discriminatory  voting practices. In spite of his decades of service, Rustin’s positions on certain political  issues were unpopular among his peers. Some thought he wasn’t critical enough  of the Vietnam War, or that he was too eager to collaborate with the political establishment including the president and congress. Others were uncomfortable with his  former communist affiliation. But ultimately, both his belief in collaboration with the government  and his membership to the communist party had been driven by his desire to maximize tangible gains in liberties for black Americans, and to do so as quickly as possible. Rustin was passed over for several  influential roles in the 1960s and 70s, but he never stopped his activism. In the 1980s, he publicly came out as gay, and was instrumental in drawing attention to the AIDS crisis until his death in 1987. In 2013, fifty years after the March On Washington, President Barack Obama posthumously  awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom, praising Rustin’s  “march towards true equality, no matter who we are  or who we love.” 