Before the world of humans began, there was the world of the gods,  made of fields, plains and gardens. Four brothers wandered this  celestial realm. They had no family other  than each other— they didn’t even know who  their parents were. One of the brothers, Deminan,  looked different from the others. His skin was covered in painful scabs, and he wondered why he alone had  been marked with this affliction. One day, while the supreme spirit  Yaya was out in his gardens, Deminan and his brothers snuck  into Yaya’s house. After feasting and exploring, they spotted a giant gourd hanging in the corner. But as they tried to look inside  the gourd, they dropped it. The gourd broke apart, releasing a deluge  that swept the brothers away, separating them from the  celestial lands forever. The waters from the gourd  formed a new world. This realm was covered in seas,  which didn’t exist in the gods’ world. The waters were full of fish  and other creatures, and dotted with islands and caves. This world of seas was also cut off  completely from the celestial realm, and the brothers wandered aimlessly, even more lost than they had been before. One day, three of the brothers  stumbled upon a house. In the house lived an elder named  Bayamanacao, and he invited them in. When Deminan caught up slightly later,  he followed them into the house. Bayamanacao told the brothers  he was their grandfather and gave them a gift of special  cassava bread. He revealed their family lineage to them: their mother had been the Earth Mother  Goddess Itibi Cahubaba and had died when they were born. The brothers were grateful for his  hospitality and insight into their past. But then Bayamanacao turned on Deminan, blowing tobacco spittle from his nose  onto Deminan’s back. The spot where the spittle landed  immediately began to swell and sting. Soon Deminan was delirious and his back was so swollen his  brothers feared he would die. Not knowing what else to do,  they cut open the welt. A turtle emerged from the  wound and swam away, alternating easily between sea  and land as she went. When Deminan recovered from his delirium, he finally understood what the  curse of his disease meant: he was a caracaracol,  able to communicate with the gods. He was the link between the celestial  realm and the earthly realm. Deminan was the first in a long  lineage of caracaracols. The world of seas he and his brothers  had created when they dropped the gourd became the world of humans, where the caracaracols who followed  Deminan maintained the delicate balance between people and gods. But their unique power came at a price: Deminan and all the caracaracols  who followed him continued to suffer from the illness that  had first marked Deminan as special. Represented in Taino carvings  and figurines with a swollen back and emaciated arms, the caracaracol is both cursed and blessed to be a conduit between worlds. 