As dawn breaks over Athens,  Pheidias is already late for work. The year is 432 BCE, and he’s the architekton,  or chief builder, for the Parthenon—  Athens’ newest and largest temple. When completed, his masterpiece will be  an enormous shrine to the goddess Athena, and a testament to the glory  of the Athenians. But when he arrives onsite he finds  five epistatai, or city officials, waiting to confront him. They accuse Pheidias of embezzling gold designated for the temple’s  sacred central statue. He has until sundown to provide  all the temple’s expenses and account for every flake of gold—  or face the judgement of the courts. Though he’s insulted by these  false charges, Pheidias isn’t surprised. Pericles, the politician  who commissioned the Parthenon, has many enemies in city government, and this project  is somewhat controversial. The public is expecting a classic temple  in the Doric style: simple columns supporting  a horizontal entablature, crowned with a triangular roof. But Pheidias’ plans are far more radical  by Athenian standards. His designs combine Doric columns  with a sweeping Ionic frieze, hosting a vast panorama of the city’s  Great Panathenaic festival. Not only will this sculpture show  humans and gods side by side— something never before seen  in a temple’s décor— it will also cost much more  than the traditional approach. Praying to the Gods that his colleagues  have been keeping track of their spending, Pheidias sets off to prove his innocence. First, he checks in with his architects  Iktinos and Callicrates. Rather than using a blueprint, they pore over the syngraphai,  or general plan, and paradeigma, a 3D model. Without an exact blueprint, the team  often has to resolve issues in real time, guided only by careful calculation  and their instinct for symmetry. Maintaining this symmetry  has proven especially difficult. The Parthenon is built on a curve  with the columns leaning slightly inwards. To project strength, and potentially keep the columns  looking straight from a distance, the architects incorporated entasis,  or slight bulging, in each column. For the temple’s other elements, the team calculates symmetry by employing relatively consistent proportions across the design. But their shifting plans require  constant recalculations. After helping solve one such computation, Pheidias collects his colleagues’  gold records and heads off to receive  a special delivery. Immense marble blocks for the Parthenon’s  pediment have just arrived from quarries at Mount Pentelikon. The usual ramps would collapse under the weight  of these 2 to 3 ton stone blocks, so Pheidias orders the construction  of new pulleys. After recording the additional expense and supervising  the construction all afternoon, he finally arrives  at the sculpture workshop. His sculptors are carving  92 mythical scenes, or metopes, to decorate the temple. Every carving depicts fighting  from different epic battles— each a mythical representation  of Greece’s victory over Persia about 40 years earlier. No temple has ever used  so many metopes before, and each scene adds to the temple’s  ballooning expenses. Finally, Pheidias turns  to his primary responsibility, and the focal point of the entire temple. Covered in thick layers of gold, minutely decorated, and towering above her worshippers, this will be a statue of the city’s  patron and protector: Athena Parthenos. When the temple is complete,  throngs will gather on its perimeter— offering prayers, performing sacrifices, and pouring libations  for the goddess of wisdom. Pheidias spends the rest of the day designing finishing touches  for the statue, and as the light fades,  the epistatai arrive to confront him. After looming over his records,  they look up triumphantly. Pheidias may have accounted  for the temple’s general spending, but his records show no mention  of the statue’s gold. At that moment, Pericles himself arrives  to save his chief builder. The temple’s sponsor tells  them that all the gold on the statue can be removed and weighed individually  to prove Pheidias’ innocence. Assigning laborers to the task— and charging the officials to watch  them late into the night— Pheidias and his patron  leave their adversaries to the mercy of mighty Athena. 