You’ve been accused of a crime  you did not commit. It’s impossible to prove your innocence. If you insist that you’re innocent anyway, you’ll likely be found guilty  and executed. But if you confess, apologize,  and implicate others for good measure, you’ll go free. Do you give a false confession—  or risk a public hanging? This was the choice facing  those accused of witchcraft in the village of Salem, Massachusetts  between February 1692 and May 1693. They were the victims of paranoia  about the supernatural, misdirected religious fervor— and a justice system that valued  repentance over truth. Salem was settled in 1626 by Puritans,  a group of English protestants. Life was strict and isolated  for the people of Salem. Battles with their  Native American neighbors and groups of French settlers were commonplace. People feared starvation and disease, and relations between villagers  were strained. To make matters worse, 1692 brought  one of the coldest winters on record. That winter, two cousins, 9 year old Betty Parris and  11 year old Abigail Williams started behaving very strangely. A physician found nothing  physically wrong — but diagnosed the girls  as under “an evil hand.” Puritans believed that the Devil wreaked  havoc in the world through human agents, or witches, who blighted nature,  conjured fiendish apparitions, and tormented children. As news swept through the village,  the symptoms appeared to spread. Accounts describe 12 so-called  “afflicted” girls contorting their bodies, having fits,  and complaining of prickling skin. Four of the girls soon accused three local women of tormenting them. All three of the accused were considered  outsiders in some way. On February 29th,  the authorities arrested Sarah Good, a poor pregnant mother  of a young daughter, Sarah Osbourne, who had long been absent from church and was suing the family  of one of her accusers, and Tituba, an enslaved woman  in Betty Parris’s home known by her first name only. Tituba denied harming the girls at first. But then she confessed to practicing  witchcraft on the Devil’s orders, and charged Good and Osbourne  with having forced her. Osbourne and Good both  maintained their innocence. Osbourne died in prison, while Good’s  husband turned against her in court, testifying that she "was a witch  or would be one very quickly." Good’s 4 year old daughter  was imprisoned and eventually gave testimony  against her mother. Meanwhile, Good gave birth in jail. Her baby died, and she was convicted  and hanged shortly thereafter. Tituba was held in custody until May, and then released. These three victims were  just the beginning. As accusations multiplied,  others, like Tituba, made false confession to save themselves. The authorities even reportedly  told one accused witch that she would be hanged if she did not  confess, and freed if she did. They were not particularly interested in thoroughly investigating the charges— in keeping with their Church’s teachings,  they preferred that the accused confessed, asked for forgiveness, and promised  not to engage in more witchcraft. The court accepted all kinds  of dubious evidence, including so-called “spectral evidence” in which the girls began raving when  supposedly touched by invisible ghosts. Complicating matters further,  many of the jurors in the trials were relatives of the accusers, compromising their objectivity. Those who dared to speak out,  such as Judge Nathanial Saltonstall, came under suspicion. By the spring of 1693,  over a hundred people had been imprisoned, and 14 women  and 6 men had been executed. By this time, accusations were starting  to spread beyond Salem to neighboring communities, and even  the most powerful figures were targets. When his own wife was accused, the governor of Massachusetts colony  suspended the trials. Sentences were amended,  prisoners released, and arrests stopped. Some have speculated that the girls  were suffering from hallucinations caused by fungus; or a condition that caused  swelling of the brain. But ultimately, the reason  for their behavior is unknown. What we do know is that adults  accepted wild accusations by children as hard evidence. Today, the Salem Witch Trials remain  a cautionary tale of the dangers of groupthink  and scapegoating, and the power of fear  to manipulate human perception. 