Before the sun never  set on the British Empire, before Genghis Khan swept the steppe, before Rome extended its influence to encircle the Mediterranean Sea, there was ancient Assyria. Considered by historians  to be the first true empire, Assyria’s innovations laid the groundwork  for every superpower that’s followed. At its height, in the 7th century BCE, the Assyrian Empire stretched  across modern Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, and parts of Turkey, Iran, and Egypt. Its wonders included a vast library  and large botanical and zoological park. But the story of Assyria’s rise  to dominance began many centuries earlier, in the Late Bronze Age,  in a city called Ashur. Ashur was a tin and textiles  trading center located along the Tigris River  in northern Iraq. It shared its name with a god thought  to be an embodiment of the city and later of the entire empire. For the administration-minded Assyrians, politics and religion were closely linked. Around 1300 BCE, a high priest named Ashur-uballit I took the title of king and initiated a tradition  of military campaigns, effectively transforming Assyria from a city-state to a territorial state. This meant that a single  administrative entity oversaw many places, cultures,  and peoples. For the next 150 years, Assyria extended its reach and thrived. In the 12th century BCE, a mysterious catastrophe  that still bewilders archaeologists caused the Assyrians  to lose much of their territory. A few hundred years later, however, Assyrian kings began  a new round of conquests. This time, they honed  their administrative system into an empire  that would last generations. Assyrians were military innovators  and merciless conquerors. During their conquests, they used siege tactics and cruel  punishments for those who opposed them, including impalement and flaying. The growth of their empire  was due, in part, to their strategy  of deporting local populations, then shifting them around the empire to fulfill different needs. This broke peoples’ bonds  with their homelands and severed loyalties among local groups. Once the Assyrians conquered an area, they built cities connected  by well-maintained royal roads. Often, when a new king came to power, he would build a new capital. With each move, new palaces and temples  were erected and lavishly decorated. Although kings claimed absolute power, we know that an extensive system  of courtiers, provincial officials, and scholars influenced affairs. At least one woman, Sammuramat,  ruled the kingdom. Assyrian rulers celebrated  their military excursions by having representations  of their exploits carved into the walls  of their newly built palaces. But despite the picture of a ruthless  war state projected by these records, the Assyrian kings were also interested  in the cultural traditions of the region, especially those of Babylonia,  a separate state to the south. Babylonia had been  a cultural leader for millennia, stretching back  to the beginning of writing at the end of the 4th millennium BCE. Assyria saw itself as the inheritor  and protector of this tradition. Assyrian rulers supported scholars in specialties ranging  from medicine to magic, and the capital cities, like Ninevah, were home to elaborate parks and gardens that housed plants  and animals from around the empire. One of Assyria’s final rulers,  Ashurbanipal, sent scholars throughout Babylonia to gather up and copy ancient literary works. Ashurbanipal’s library took the form  of clay tablets inscribed with cuneiform in the languages  of Akkadian and Sumerian. The library was lost during the final sack of Ninevah in 612 BCE. But thanks to a 19th century  archaeological excavation, many masterpieces of ancient literature, including the Epic of Gilgamesh  and the Babylonian Creation Epic, survive today. After centuries of rule, the Assyrian Empire fell to  the Babylonians and Medes between 612 and 609 BCE. Yet the innovations that the Assyrians  pioneered live on. Their emphasis on constant innovation, efficient administration, and excellent infrastructure set the standard for every empire that’s followed them in the region and across the globe. 