Ok,  so you, are a 4 billion year old meat robot. Yeah, you heard me right. In fact, as you're made of  30-ish trillion cells, and each of those have their own task, you're a robot made of trillions of mini robots- you are a mega-meat-bot! And your mission, for the past 4 billion  years or so- and for as long as you keep  playing this game of life- is to safeguard the code. To duplicate it.  To pass it on. The thing is, you're rubbish at  copying your own code. Every time it's copied, errors crop up. Not good when an error makes  a robot worse at surviving, but sometimes a mistake  helps them survive... and they pass that glitch in the code on- that's evolution in a nutshell, right? Which means you're not the result  of some fancy design, I'm afraid. You're a result of billions of  years of bad copies. Go you. Another reason you're not totally awesome is because that megabot of yours  often breaks down. Fortunately, cardiologists, immunologists,  microbiologists- all the "ists"- have spent centuries figuring out  our sensors and wiring so if something does go wrong,  they can usually fix it. Where they struggle, though, is when  the machinery turns on itself- when a copying error leads a cell  to start dividing uncontrollably, to grow and multiply into a tumor. That's cancer. And sadly, even with the might  of our modern medicine, some cancers evade treatment. But this is where a new band of  biologists step into the story: The "Synthetic Biologists." These biohackers are mashing up science,  medicine and engineering to rewrite the code and fix  the un-fixable. Biohackers are going into a  patient's genetic code and reprogramming their own immune system to recognize cancer cells  and destroy them. It's called CAR T-cell therapy,  and it's awesome. See, you're constantly under  attack by pathogens- single-celled bacteria, viruses and fungi. Despite deciding, back in the day, to stay solo and not 'avengers assemble'  like you did, those pathogens see you, in all  your mega-meat-bot glory, as a fortress ripe for the plundering. Thankfully, you've got a security team  in place to battle these invaders- your immune system- and some of it's top guards are  your white blood cells. They trawl the darkness  that is your inner space, checking the IDs of any cells they pass... although they're not name badges, but rather protein fragments on  the cell's surface called antigens. There are two types of these guards:  T-cells and B-cells. T-cells check those antigen IDs  using special claws- receptors that lock with a  particular antigen. If they find a match, they attach and  they release toxic chemicals that burst open the  invading cell's membrane. Their B-cell workmates create antibodies- loads of small proteins, little claws that latch perfectly onto  a particular antigen, marking them for destruction. These two comrades have got your back and your immune system is brilliant at  spotting and fighting pathogens that invade from outside. However, they're not so good at spotting your  own cells that have gone rogue. The antigens on cancerous cells  don't look weird, they look a lot like your own cells, and the T's and B's aren't  programmed to attack them. The usual way to deal with cancer is  to try to cut the tumor out, or turn to radiotherapy and  then chemotherapy to destroy or block the  growth of cancer cells, but if it's a blood cancer, if it's  floating around your whole body, you can't do that. And if the blood cancer actually starts in your white blood cells- those key guards in your immune system- you'll really struggle to spot it. That's the case with acute  lymphoblastic leukemia, and that's where CAR T-cell therapy  is kicking butt. The biohackers are reprogramming a  patient's own immune system to recognize particular antigens- those  particular protein fragments- on the cancer cells. To do it, you first need millions  of a patient's T-cells Then, to get a T-cell to do  something different, you need to replace its normal  code with something new, something you've designed. What synthetic biologists can now do with DNA is super cool- they use a computer to put together  their own sequences of bases- the chemical letters that spell  out the DNA- then they model what that new genetic  code will do on a computer and then make those sequences  on a DNA printer- yeah, that's a thing!- printing not with ink, or with a plastic  polymer like in a 3D printer, but with those fundamental  building blocks of life, with those A's and C's and T's and G's. The new code they designed for a  T-cell has 3 key instructions: 1. It tells it how to recognize  and kill a cancer cell. More specifically, how to modify an antibody- what the B-cells make to latch  onto a target antigen. The antibody is modified to  make a new receptor that can detect the particular antigens  on the specific cancer. 2. It tells it to make copies of itself  when it finds that cancer cell and 3. It tells it to survive  in the patient's body. To get this new code into  the patient's T-cells, you use a vector- it's something that will easily  infect the T-cell and carry that bespoke DNA in with it. And voila!  One CAR T-cell. The name comes from a fire-breathing  monster from Ancient Greece, that had a lion's head, a goat's  body and a serpent's tail. It was called "Chimera"- a name that has now come to be used for something that contains two or  more different types of tissues or cells. As this newly engineered cell's genetic  code is part T-cell, part antibody, it's a "C"himera and it goes in search  of the cancer's "A"ntigen using its new "R"eceptor. Before you put the multiplied up  T-cells back into the patient, you give them a mild dose of chemotherapy  to wipe their existing T-cells. Then you simply reinsert the  now modified T-cells- the CAR T-cells- and they follow their normal DNA  programming to move and search. However, thanks to their new  butt-kicking code, they've changed what they're looking for: they're now on a mission to find the  cancerous cells and destroy them. Unlike conventional chemical-based drugs that get used up or excreted from  the body pretty quickly, CAR T-cells are living drugs that stay in  the patient's bloodstream for years. That's a huge pro. The flip side is that they're expensive- each CAR T-cell treatment is  bespoke to the patient- and it's more difficult to get them to work with common cancers like breast or lung, because you need a  specific antigen on the cancer cells for the CAR T-cell to target- and it's much easier to find  that in blood cancers. It's still early days, though, and there's an exciting  future for CAR T-cell therapy. Researchers like Dr. Martin Pule  and his team at UCL, are working on improving the leukemia  and lymphoma treatments even further, and there's recently been some  promising work on solid cancers. Thanks to CAR T-cell therapy, the survival rate for B acute lymphoblastic leukemia has improved hugely -nearly all patients go into remission- which means that leukemia cannot  be detected anymore- and most patients stay in remission. Biohacking is here, and it can reprogram your own  genetic code to enable your mega-meat-bot to do things it's never been  able to do before! 