A rabbit attempts to play a church organ, while a knight fights a giant snail and a naked man blows a trumpet  with his rear end. Painted with squirrel-hair brushes  on vellum or parchment by monks, nuns, and urban craftspeople, these bizarre images populate the  margins of the most prized books from the Middle Ages. Their illustrations often tell a second  story as rich as the text itself. Some images appear in many  different illuminated manuscripts, and often reinforce the religious  content of the books they decorated. For example, a porcupine picking  up fruit on its spines could represent the devil stealing  the fruits of faith-- or Christ taking up the sins of mankind. Medieval lore stated that a hunter  could only capture a unicorn when it lay its horn in  the lap of a virgin, so a unicorn could symbolize  either sexual temptation or Christ being captured by his enemies. Rabbits, meanwhile, could represent  human’s lustful natures— and could redeem themselves through  attempts to make sacred music despite their failings. All of these references would have  been familiar to medieval Europeans from other art forms and oral tradition, though some have grown more  mysterious over the centuries. Today, no one can say for sure what the common  motif of a knight fighting a snail means— or why the knight so often  appears to be losing. The snail might be a symbol of the  inevitability of death, which defeats even the strongest knights. Or it could represent humility, and a  knight’s need to vanquish his own pride. Many illuminated manuscripts were  copies of religious or classical texts, and the bookmakers incorporated their  own ideas and opinions in illustrations. The butt tuba, for example, was likely shorthand to  express disapproval with-- or add an ironic spin to-- the action in the text. Illuminations could also be used to  make subversive political commentary. The text of the "Smithfield Decretals" details the Church’s laws and  punishments for lawbreakers. But the margins show a fox being  hanged by geese, a possible allusion to the common people  turning on their powerful oppressors. In the "Chronica Majora," Matthew Paris summarized a  scandal of his day, in which the Welsh prince Griffin plummeted to his death  from the tower of London. Some believed the prince fell,  Paris wrote, while others thought he was pushed. He added his own take in the margins, which show the prince falling to his death while trying to escape on a rope  made of bed-sheets. Some margins told stories of  a more personal nature. "The Luttrell Psalter," a book of psalms and prayers commissioned  by Sir Geoffrey Luttrell, shows a young woman having her hair done, while a young man catches a bird in a net. The shaved patch on his  head is growing out, indicating that he is a clergyman  neglecting his duties. This alludes to a family scandal where a young cleric ran away with Sir  Geoffrey’s daughter Elizabeth. The family’s personal spiritual advisor  likely painted it into the book to remind his clients of their failings and encourage their spiritual development. Some artists even painted themselves  into the manuscripts. The opening image of Christine de  Pisan’s collected works shows de Pisan presenting  the book to the Queen of France. The queen was so impressed by de Pisan's  previous work that she commissioned her own copy. Such royal patronage enabled her to establish her own  publishing house in Paris. The tradition of illuminated manuscripts  lasted for over a thousand years. The books were created by individuals or  teams for uses as wide-ranging as private prayer aids, service books  in churches, textbooks, and protective talismans to  take into battle. Across all this variation, those tricky little drawings  in the margins are a unique window into the  minds of medieval artists. 