As the sun rises over a quiet coral reef,  one animal breaks the morning silence. Named for their vibrant scales  and beak-like teeth, these parrotfish are devouring  a particularly crunchy breakfast: rocks. It may not be immediately clear  why any creature would take bites out of the seafloor. But the diet of these flashy foragers  actually plays a key role in defending the coral reef’s  complex ecosystem. Massive coral reefs  begin with tiny coral larvae, which settle on the seafloor’s  hard surfaces and metamorphasize into coral polyps. Over time, these polyps  generate rock-like skeletons made of calcium carbonate. Together, colonies of polyps produce  large three-dimensional structures, which form the basis  of an underwater metropolis. These coral complexes are full  of nooks and crannies that house and protect  countless life forms. Even though coral reefs occupy less than  one percent of the ocean floor, these dense ecosystems are home to more  than twenty-five percent of marine life. Many fish use corals as shelters for  sleeping and to hide from large predators between their trips foraging for seaweed. As the primary food source for many  of the reef’s fish and invertebrates, seaweed is vital to this ecosystem. But in high densities,  seaweed can become problematic, and even lethal to corals. Seaweed grows on the same hard open  surfaces that coral larvae rely on, and their growth prevents new coral  from settling and expanding. These competitors have also evolved  a variety of ways to kill existing corals, including smothering and abrasion. Some seaweed species  even engage in chemical warfare— synthesizing compounds  that destroy coral on contact. This is where parrotfish come in. Like many reef fish,  these colorful creatures eat seaweed. But unlike their neighbors, parrotfish can completely remove  even the tiniest scraps of seaweed from the ocean floor. Their so-called beak is actually a mosaic  of tightly-packed teeth which can scrape and grind rock, allowing them to consume every bit  of seaweed covering a stony surface. This helps parrotfish reach seaweed  other fish can’t consume, while simultaneously clearing out  open space for new corals to settle and existing colonies to expand. Eating rocks is just one way parrotfish  help manage seaweed. Through a dynamic system  of social networks, parrotfish can convey information  to other coral dwelling fish. Each fish’s presence and simple routine  behaviors produce sensory information that nearby fish can see, hear, or smell. They can even detect changes in water  pressure produced by their neighbors using a special sensory organ. All these factors can inform  the behavior of nearby fish. For example, a fish safely entering  an open feeding ground and not getting attacked  means it’s safe to forage. Conversely, a fish rapidly leaving  a location can provide an early warning that a threat is approaching. By simply trying to stay alive, these reef fish can incidentally help  their neighbors survive— and more of these fish  means less seaweed. Unfortunately, human activities  over the last several decades have disrupted almost every part  of this complex system. In many coral reefs, overfishing  has reduced the number of parrotfish, as well as other seaweed eaters,  such as surgeonfish and rabbitfish. This has led to unchecked seaweed growth, which threatens to degrade  entire coral reefs. The parrotfish that remain  live in much smaller communities. Their reduced numbers  can weaken their social network, making surviving fish more timid  and less effective at controlling seaweed. Today, climate change and pollution  are lowering coral’s natural defenses while contributing to runaway  seaweed growth— leaving reef ecosystems  more fragile than ever. Our reefs are vitally important  to both marine and human life. Their unparalleled biodiversity offers  unique opportunities for ecotourism, sustainable fishing,  and scientific research, while their rocky structures guard  coastlines from waves and storm surges. Fortunately, continued research  into reef species like the quirky and critical parrotfish  can inform new strategies for preserving these essential ecosystems. 