In 1944, 11 years before her fateful  decision on a Montgomery Bus, Rosa Parks was investigating  a vicious crime. As an emissary for  the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, she had traveled to rural Alabama  to meet with Recy Taylor, a young woman who had been  sexually assaulted by six white men. It would be difficult enough to convince an Alabama court that even one of these men was guilty, but Rosa was undeterred. She formed a committee to defend  Recy in court, flooding the media with testimony and sparking protests  throughout the South. When a jury failed  to indict the attackers, Parks demanded the governor  assemble a new grand jury. She wrote, “I know that you will not fail to let the people of Alabama know that there is equal justice  for all of our citizens.” Throughout her life, Parks repeatedly  challenged racial violence and the prejudiced systems  protecting its perpetrators. But this work came at an enormous risk— and a personal price. Born in 1913, Rosa was raised by her  mother and grandparents in rural Alabama. But outside this loving home, the fear  of racial violence cast a long shadow. The Ku Klux Klan frequently  drove past their home, and Jim Crow laws  segregated public spaces. At 19 she settled in Montgomery and married Raymond Parks, a barber who shared her growing fury  at racial injustice. He was involved with the local chapter of the NAACP; a role many avoided  for fear of persecution. At first Raymond was eager  to keep Rosa safe from the potential dangers of activism. But as she grew more incensed at the limitations imposed on African Americans, she could no longer stand by. When she officially joined  the NAACP in 1943, Parks and Johnnie Rebecca Carr were  the only women in the Montgomery chapter. She began keeping minutes  for their meetings, and soon found herself elected  secretary of the chapter— formally beginning her secret double life. By day, Rosa worked as a seamstress to support her mother and husband. By night, she researched and documented numerous civil rights cases, from local policy disputes to high-profile murder cases and hate crimes. As secretary, she prepared public  responses on behalf of the Montgomery chapter, battling the harsh sentencing, false accusation and smear campaigns  frequently used against African Americans. In addition to her legal work, Parks  was a brilliant local strategist. As advisor to the NAACP  youth group council, she helped young people navigate  segregated systems including voter registration and  whites-only libraries. Through the cover of the NAACP, Parks strived to bring clandestine  civil rights activities into the open. She advocated for civil disobedience training and spoke out against racial violence, particularly the murder of Emmet Till. In 1955, her refusal to move  to the back of a segregated bus helped ignite the grassroots movement  she had hoped for. Parks was arrested and jailed  for her one-woman protest, where she was visited by local activists. Together they planned a twenty-four  hour bus boycott. It lasted for three hundred  and eighty-one days. Park’s simple act had transformed  nascent civil rights activism into a national movement. In 1956, the boycott ended  when the Supreme Court ruled in favor of desegregating  public transport. But this victory for the movement  had come at a great cost. Rosa had been receiving vicious death  threats throughout the campaign, and was unable to find work in Montgomery because of her political reputation. In 1957, she moved to Detroit  to continue working as a seamstress, until being hired by Congressman  John Conyers to help support his burgeoning  civil rights campaigns. Ever vigilant in the fight against racial  inequality, Parks remained active  for the next 40 years. She wrote several books, traveled across the country giving talks to support other activists, and established an institute  for the education of young people in her late husband’s memory. Today, Rosa Parks is remembered  as a radical spirit who railed against the most powerful  people and policies. Her call to action continues to resound: “knowing what must be done does away with fear.” 