## Key Pricing Strategies for Startups: You Should Charge
Let's talk about the all-important topic of pricing—how you should set your prices when starting your journey as an entrepreneur. I have five key points to discuss, with wisdom from some of the most successful startup companies.

To start off, believe it or not, one of the most common mistakes new entrepreneurs make is being afraid to charge. Some fear that their customers will turn them down, go to their competitors, or never come back. But setting a price for your product is a way of learning important things about your business. The first one is finding out if your customers are ready to pay or not. This usually has a simple "yes" or "no" answer—they either find enough value in your product to pay for it, or they don't. By charging, you can also find out who is the most willing to pay for your product. This can help you decide which customer segment you should go after. Additionally, by setting high prices, you get to measure how much value customers see in your product. If no one agrees to pay, that's a useful lesson too—it means you might need to add more value to your product or maybe you're targeting the wrong customer group.

Let me tell you about Stripe, a successful startup. Early on, they priced their product way higher than their competitors. They did this to see how much their customers valued specific features of their service. It was a brave move to check if they had made a product that provides high value, instead of competing on low prices.

Now, you may be wondering: where should I start with my pricing strategy? My first piece of advice is not to overthink it. Looking online, you can get lost in a sea of complicated charts, formulas and techniques to "optimize" your pricing. When you're starting, it's more important to find the right ballpark for your price. For example, if you charge $10 for your product and find out customers are willing to pay $100, it's time for a change. But if your customers would pay $15 or $20 when you charge $10, you're in the right territory. Don't stress about it too much—pricing can be adjusted over the years, with a better understanding of your product's value to your customers. It's unlikely that you'll get your pricing strategy perfect from day one, and that's okay. You have ample opportunity down the line to optimize it. 

