Ethic and her robot Hedge agree  to help the resistance leader, Adila, sabotage the art-incinerating  furnace-bots. In exchange, Adila promises to lead them  to the first object of Ethic’s quest, an artifact called the Node of Power. Years ago, there was just  one furnace-bot. It had a 0 inside its furnace  and an unknown, randomly generated serial number. Over time, the original self-replicated  to produce more identical furnace-bots. Each child inherited the original’s  unknown serial number within its furnace, and had a random, unique serial  number of its own inscribed on its shell. The second generation of furnace- bots also self-replicated in the same way, always passing their own serial  numbers to their offspring’s furnaces. This continued on for many generations. Today, each furnace-bot receives  its orders from its parent. So if Ethic can find the original 0 bot and somehow change its instructions, she could take over  the entire army, all at once. Adila has the perfect solution: a data crystal that she’s  been carrying for years, waiting for the right moment  to activate it. It contains a program designed  to gain control of a bot and give it new instructions. But if it’s uploaded to any furnace- bot other than the original, the 0 bot will override  the instructions and destroy the data crystal  in the process. The feeding is just  a few minutes away, and there’s only one  chance to get this right. Fortunately, Hedge’s ability  to store data can help. In programming, a piece of information gets  stored in something called a variable. Variables are basically containers that  hold onto numbers, words, or other values. How does Ethic program Hedge to find  the original 0 bot as quickly as possible? Pause now to figure it out for yourself. Here’s a hint. Programs can be written to have  as many variables as you need, but you can solve this problem  with just one. Hedge can use it to store  a serial number and replace it with a new one  as often as he needs. Pause now to figure it out for yourself. A key insight here is that Hedge  doesn’t need to map out the entire set of relationships to find  the original furnace-bot. If, for example, he gets lucky and picks  the original one right away, he’ll be done. But if he starts with any other bot, he can still find a path that leads  straight back to the 0-bot by following a simple set of instructions. To help craft them, let’s first  simplify the problem. Let’s say there were only  three furnace-bots; a parent and two children, but you don’t  know which is which. You could have Hedge pick one  at random and look inside its furnace. Now, you know the family tree  looks like this. If the number inside the furnace is a 0,  you’ve found the parent. If not, then no matter  which child you chose, it must have the parent’s serial  number in its furnace. So in this scenario, you’re guaranteed  to find the parent in one or two moves. In actuality, there are many  furnace-bots, and you don’t know how  many generations there are nor what the family tree looks like. But you don’t need to, because Hedge can just keep repeating  the same sequence of actions until he gets to the original. How? With a loop. Hedge can pick any bot at random,  look inside its furnace, and store that serial  number as a variable. Then he’ll begin the following  loop that will repeat until the stored variable equals 0, the furnace number of the original bot: 1. Find the bot whose shell serial number  matches the stored number. 2. Look inside its furnace. 3. Store that new number,  overwriting the old one. Once the loop ends, we’ll know  that Hedge has found the 0 bot, so he should upload the control program. So here’s what happens: Hedge only takes 5 repetitions  to find the original: robot 733 has the 0 in its furnace. In a blink of a mechanical eye, the program spreads through the entire  army, and Adila takes control. She has the furnace-bots  give off theatrical bouts of flame to hide the fact that they’re now secretly safe-guarding all of that artistic output. Now that Ethic’s delivered  the furnace-bots, Adila honors her end of the deal. She leads Ethic and Hedge  to the location of the first artifact, the Node of Power. There, one thing is immediately clear: they’ll have to steal it. 