During World War I, one of the  horrors of trench warfare was a poisonous yellow cloud  called mustard gas. For those unlucky enough to be exposed, it made the air impossible to breathe,  burned their eyes, and caused huge blisters on exposed skin. Scientists tried desperately to develop an antidote to this vicious weapon of war. In the process they discovered the gas  was irrevocably damaging the bone marrow of affected soldiers— halting its  ability to make blood cells. Despite these awful effects,  it gave scientists an idea. Cancer cells share a characteristic with  bone marrow: both replicate rapidly. So could one of the atrocities of war become a champion in the  fight against cancer? Researchers in the 1930s  investigated this idea by injecting compounds derived  from mustard gas into the veins of cancer patients. It took time and trial and error to find  treatments that did more good than harm, but by the end of World War II, they discovered what became known  as the first chemotherapy drugs. Today, there are more than 100. Chemotherapy drugs are delivered  through pills and injections and use "cytotoxic agents," which means  compounds that are toxic to living cells. Essentially, these medicines cause some  level of harm to all cells in the body— even healthy ones. But they reserve their most powerful  effects for rapidly-dividing cells, which is precisely the hallmark of cancer. Take, for example, those first  chemotherapy drugs, which are still used today and  are called alkylating agents. They’re injected into the bloodstream, which delivers them to  cells all over the body. Once inside, when the cell exposes  its DNA in order to copy it, they damage the building blocks of  DNA’s double helix structure, which can lead to cell death unless  the damage is repaired. Because cancer cells multiply rapidly, they take in a high concentration  of alkylating agents, and their DNA is frequently exposed  and rarely repaired. So they die off more often  than most other cells, which have time to fix damaged DNA and don’t accumulate the same  concentrations of alkylating agents. Another form of chemotherapy involves  compounds called microtubule stabilizers. Cells have small tubes that assemble  to help with cell division and DNA replication, then break back down. When microtubule stabilizers  get inside a cell, they keep those tiny tubes  from disassembling. That prevents the cell from completing  its replication, leading to its death. These are just two examples of the six  classes of chemotherapy drugs we use to treat cancer today. But despite its huge benefits,  chemotherapy has one big disadvantage: it affects other healthy cells in the body that naturally have to renew rapidly. Hair follicles, the cells of the mouth,  the gastrointestinal lining, the reproductive system, and bone marrow  are hit nearly as hard as cancer. Similar to cancer cells, the rapid  production of these normal cells means that they’re reaching for  resources more frequently— and are therefore more exposed to  the effects of chemo drugs. That leads to several common side  effects of chemotherapy, including hair loss, fatigue, infertility, nausea, and vomiting. Doctors commonly prescribe options  to help manage these side-effects, such as strong anti-nausea medications. For hair loss, devices called cold caps  can help lower the temperature around the head and  constrict blood vessels, limiting the amount of chemotherapy  drugs that reach hair follicles. And once a course of chemo  treatment is over, the healthy tissues that’ve been badly  affected by the drug will recover and begin to renew as usual. In 2018 alone, over 17 million people  world-wide received a cancer diagnosis. But chemotherapy and other treatments  have changed the outlook for so many. Just take the fact that up to 95% of  individuals with testicular cancer survive it, thanks to advances  in treatment. Even in people with acute myeloid  leukemia— an aggressive blood cancer— chemotherapy puts an estimated  60% of patients under 60 into remission following their  first phase of treatment. Researchers are still developing  more precise interventions that only target the intended  cancer cells. That’ll help improve survival rates  while leaving healthy tissues with reduced harm, making one of the best tools we have  in the fight against cancer even better. 