In 1901, David Hänig published a paper that forever changed  our understanding of taste. His research led to what we know  today as the taste map: an illustration that divides the tongue  into four separate areas. According to this map, receptors at the tip of our tongues capture sweetness, bitterness  is detected at the tongue’s base, and along the sides, receptors capture  salty and sour sensations. Since its invention, the taste map  has been published in textbooks and newspapers. The only problem with this map,  is that it’s wrong. In fact, it’s not even  an accurate representation of what Hänig originally discovered. The tongue map is a common misconception— something widely believed  but largely incorrect. So where do misconceptions  like this come from, and what makes a fake fact  so easy to believe? It’s true that the tongue map’s  journey begins with David Hänig. As part of his dissertation  at Leipzig University, Hänig analyzed taste sensitivities across  the tongue for the four basic flavors. Using sucrose for sweet,  quinine sulfate for bitter, hydrochloric acid for sour,  and salt for salty, Hänig applied these stimuli to compare  differences in taste thresholds across a subject’s tongue. He hoped to better understand  the physiological mechanisms that affected these four flavors, and his data suggested that sensitivity  for each taste did in fact vary across the tongue. The maximum sensation for sweet  was located at the tongue’s tip; bitter flavors were strongest at the back; salt was strongest in this area, and sour at the middle  of the tongue’s sides. But Hänig was careful  to note that every sensation could also be tasted across the tongue, and that the areas he identified offered  very small variations in intensity. Like so many misconceptions, the tongue map represents a distortion  of its original source, however the nature of that distortion  can vary. Some misconceptions  are comprised of disinformation— false information intentionally designed  to mislead people. But many misconceptions,  including the tongue map, center on misinformation— false or misleading information that results from unintentional  inaccuracy. Misinformation is most often shaped  by mistakes and human error, but the specific mistakes  that lead to a misconception can be surprisingly varied. In the case of the tongue map, Hänig’s dissertation was written  in German, meaning the paper could only be  understood by readers fluent in German and well versed in Hanig’s  small corner of academia. This kicked off a game of telephone  that re-shaped Häing’s research every time it was shared  with outside parties. Less than a decade after his dissertation, newspapers were falsely insisting  that experiments could prove sweetness was imperceptible  on the back of the tongue. The second culprit  behind the tongue map’s spread were the images  that Hänig’s work inspired. In 1912, a rough version of the map  appeared in a newspaper article that cautiously described  some of the mysteries behind taste and smell research. Featuring clear labels across the tongue, the article’s illustration simplified Hänig’s more-complicated  original diagrams. Variations of this approachable image  became repeatedly cited, often without credit or nuanced  consideration for Hänig’s work. Eventually this image spread  to textbooks and classrooms as a purported truth  of how we experience taste. But perhaps the factor that most  contributed to this misconception was its narrative simplicity. In many ways, the map complements our desire for clear  stories about the world around us— a quality not always present  in the sometimes-messy fields of science. For example, even the number of tastes we have is more  complicated than Hänig’s work suggests. Umami— also known as savory—  is now considered the fifth basic taste, and many still debate  the existence of tastes like fatty, alkaline, metallic,  and water-like. Once we hear a good story, it can be difficult to change  how we see that information, even in the face of new evidence. So, next time you see a convenient chart  or read a surprising anecdote, try to maintain a healthy skepticism— because misconceptions  can leave a bitter taste on every part of your tongue. 