In January of 1953, a tidal surge  shook the North Sea. The titanic waves flooded  the Dutch coastline, killing almost 2,000 people. 54 years later, a similar storm  threatened the region. But this time, the Netherlands  were ready. As the water swelled, state-of-the-art computer sensors  activated emergency protocols. Over the next 30 minutes, a pair of 240-meter steel arms  swung shut, protecting the channel ahead. Using 680-tonne ball joints, the barrier moved in rhythm  with the shifting wind and waves. By morning, the storm had passed  with minimal flooding. The first field activation  of the Maeslantkering had been a resounding success. As one of the planet’s largest mobile  structures, this storm surge barrier  is a marvel of human engineering. But the Maeslantkering is just one part of a massive, interlocking system of water controls  known as the Delta Works— the most sophisticated flood prevention  project in the world. The Netherlands has a long history  with water management. The country lies along the delta  of three major European rivers, and nearly a quarter of its territory  is below sea level. This geography makes the region  extremely prone to flooding. So much so, that some of the earliest  Dutch governing bodies were informal “water boards” that  coordinated flood protection projects. But after the storms of 1953, the Dutch government took more official measures. They established the Delta Commission, and tasked them with protecting  the entire southwestern region. Focusing on densely populated cities, their aim was to reduce the annual odds  of flooding below 1 in 10,000— about 100 times as safe as the average coastal city. Accomplishing this lofty goal required various infrastructure projects along the southwestern coast. The first line of defense was to dam  the region’s flood-prone estuaries. These large inlets fed many of  the country’s rivers into the North Sea, and during storms they allowed  flood water to surge inland. Using a series of dams, the Delta  Commission transformed these estuaries into expansive lakes that serve  as nature preserves and community parks. However, this solution wouldn’t work  for the Nieuwe Waterweg. As the lifeblood of the local shipping  industry, this passage had to be kept open  in safe conditions, and barricaded during storm surges. In 1998, the completed Maeslantkering provided the flexible  protection necessary. Alongside additional barriers,  like grassy dikes and concrete seawalls, these fortifications made up the bulk  of the Delta Works project, which was primarily focused on  holding back ocean storms. But in the following decades,  the Dutch pursued additional plans to complement the Delta Works  and protect against floods further inland. Under the "Room for the River" plan, farms and dikes were relocated  away from the shore. This left more space for water  to collect in low-lying floodplains, creating reservoirs and habitats  for local wildlife. This strategic retreat not only  decreased flood risk, but allowed for the redeveloped  settlements to be built more densely and sustainably. Perhaps no city embodies the Netherlands'  multi-pronged approach to water management as much as Rotterdam, a thriving city  almost entirely below sea level. When a storm threatens, densely populated older districts  are protected by traditional dikes. Meanwhile, newer districts  have been artificially elevated, often sporting green roofs  that store rainwater. Numerous structures around the city  transform into water storage facilities, including parking garages and plazas which normally serve as theaters  and sports arenas. Meanwhile in the harbor, floating  pavilions rise with the water level. These are the first of several planned  amphibious structures, some of which house water purification systems and solar collectors. These strategies are just some  of the technologies and policies that have put the Netherlands  at the cutting edge of water management. The country continues to find new ways  to make cities more resilient to natural disasters. And as the rising sea levels  caused by climate change threaten low-lying cities  across the world, the Netherlands offers an exceptional  example of how to go with the flow. 