In 1165, copies of a strange letter began  to circulate throughout Western Europe. It spoke of a fantastical realm, containing the Tower of Babel  and the Fountain of Youth— all ruled over by the letter’s  mysterious author: Prester John. Today, we know that this extraordinary king never existed. But the legend of this mythical kingdom  and its powerful ruler would impact the decisions of European leaders for the next 400 years. Prester John’s myth would propel  the age of exploration, inspire intercontinental diplomacy,  and indirectly begin a civil war. When Prester John’s letter appeared,  Europe was embroiled in the Crusades. In this series of religious wars, Europeans campaigned to seize what  they regarded as the Christian Holy Land. The Church vilified any faith  outside of Christianity, including that of the Jewish and Muslim  communities populating the region. Crusaders were eager to find Christian kingdoms to serve as allies in their war. And they were particularly interested in rumors of a powerful Christian king who had defeated an enormous  Muslim army in the Far East. In fact, it was a Mongol horde including converted Christian tribes that had routed the army. But news of this victory  traveled unreliably. Merchants and emissaries filled  gaps in the story with epic poems and Biblical fragments. By the time the story reached Europe, the Mongol horde had been replaced with a great Christian army, commanded by a king who shared  the Crusader’s vision of marching on Jerusalem. And when a letter allegedly written by  this so-called “Prester John” appeared, European rulers were thrilled. While the letter’s actual author  remains unknown, its stereotypes about the East  and alignment with European goals indicate it was a Western forgery. But despite the letter’s obvious origins  as European propaganda, the appeal of Prester John’s myth  was too great for the Crusaders to ignore. Before long, European mapmakers were guessing  the location of his mythical kingdom. In the 13th and 14th centuries,  European missionaries went East, along the newly revived Silk Road. They weren’t searching for  the letter’s author, who would have been over a century old;  but rather, for his descendants. The title of Prester John  was briefly identified with several Central Asian rulers, but it soon became clear that the Mongols were largely non-Christian. And as their Empire began to decline, Europeans began pursuing alternate routes  to the Far East, and new clues to Prester John’s location. At the same time these explorers  went south, Ethiopian pilgrims began traveling north. In Rome, these visitors  quickly attracted the interest of European scholars and cartographers. Since Ethiopia had been converted  to Christianity in the 4th century, the stories of their African homeland  fit perfectly into Prester John’s legend. Portuguese explorers scoured Africa  for the kingdom, until a mix of confusion and diplomacy  finally turned myth into reality. The Ethiopians graciously received  their European guests, who were eager to do business  with the ruler they believed to be Prester John. Though the Ethiopians were initially  confused by the Portuguese’s unusual name for their Emperor, they were savvy enough to recognize  the diplomatic capital it afforded them. The Ethiopian diplomats played the part  of Prester John’s subjects, and the Portuguese triumphantly announced an alliance with the fabled sovereign— over 350 years after the European  letter had begun the search. But this long-awaited partnership  was quickly tested. A decade later, the Sultanate of Adal, a regional power supported  by the Ottoman Empire, invaded Ethiopia. The Portuguese sent troops that helped  Ethiopians win this conflict. But by this time, it was clear that Ethiopia was not  the powerful ally Europe had hoped. Worse still, the increasingly intolerant  Roman Catholic Church now deemed the Ethiopian sect  of Christianity heretical. Their subsequent attempts to convert  the people they once revered as ideal Christians would eventually spark a civil war, and in the 1630s,  Ethiopia cut ties with Europe. Over the next two centuries, the legend of Prester John  slowly faded into oblivion— ending the reign of a king who made  history despite having never existed. 