Billions of years ago  on the young planet Earth simple organic compounds assembled  into more complex coalitions that could grow and reproduce. They were the very first life on Earth, and they gave rise to every one  of the billions of species that have inhabited our planet since. At the time, Earth was almost completely  devoid of what we’d recognize as a suitable  environment for living things. The young planet had widespread  volcanic activity and an atmosphere that created  hostile conditions. So where on Earth could life begin? To begin the search for  the cradle of life, it’s important to first understand the  basic necessities for any life form. Elements and compounds essential to life include hydrogen, methane, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, phosphates, and ammonia. In order for these ingredients to comingle and react with each other, they need a liquid solvent: water. And in order to grow and reproduce, all life needs a source of energy. Life forms are divided into two camps: autotrophs, like plants, that generate  their own energy, and heterotrophs, like animals, that  consume other organisms for energy. The first life form wouldn’t have had  other organisms to consume, of course, so it must have been an autotroph, generating energy either from the sun or from chemical gradients. So what locations meet these criteria? Places on land or close to the surface  of the ocean have the advantage of access to sunlight. But at the time when life began, the UV radiation on Earth’s surface was likely too harsh for life  to survive there. One setting offers protection  from this radiation and an alternative energy source: the hydrothermal vents that wind across the ocean floor, covered by kilometers of seawater  and bathed in complete darkness. A hydrothermal vent is a fissure  in the Earth’s crust where seawater seeps into magma  chambers and is ejected back out  at high temperatures, along with a rich slurry of minerals  and simple chemical compounds. Energy is particularly concentrated at the steep chemical gradients  of hydrothermal vents. There’s another line of evidence  that points to hydrothermal vents: the Last Universal Common Ancestor  of life, or LUCA for short. LUCA wasn’t the first life form,  but it’s as far back as we can trace. Even so, we don’t actually know what  LUCA looked like— there’s no LUCA fossil, no modern-day  LUCA still around— instead, scientists identified genes that are commonly found in species across all three domains  of life that exist today. Since these genes are shared across  species and domains, they must have been inherited from  a common ancestor. These shared genes tell us that LUCA lived in a hot, oxygen-free place and harvested energy from a chemical  gradient— like the ones at hydrothermal vents. There are two kinds of hydrothermal vent: black smokers and white smokers. Black smokers release acidic,  carbon-dioxide-rich water, heated to hundreds of degrees Celsius and packed with sulphur, iron, copper, and other metals essential to life. But scientists now believe that black  smokers were too hot for LUCA— so now the top candidates for the  cradle of life are white smokers. Among the white smokers, a field of hydrothermal vents on the  Mid-Atlantic Ridge called Lost City has become the most favored candidate  for the cradle of life. The seawater expelled here is highly  alkaline and lacks carbon dioxide, but is rich in methane and offers  more hospitable temperatures. Adjacent black smokers may have  contributed the carbon dioxide necessary for life to evolve at Lost City, giving it all the components to support  the first organisms that radiated into the incredible  diversity of life on Earth today. 