The talented young herbalist named Xu Xian was in trouble. It should have been a victorious moment– he had just opened his very  own medicine shop. But he bought his supplies from  his former employer, and the resentful man  sold him rotten herbs. As Xu Xian wondered what to do with this  useless inventory, patients flooded into his shop. A plague had stricken the city, and he had nothing to treat them. Just as he was starting to panic, his wife, Bai Su Zhen, produced a recipe to use the rotten herbs as medicine. Her remedy cured all the plague-afflicted citizens immediately. Xu Xian’s former boss even had to buy back some of the rotten herbs to treat his own family. Shortly after, a monk named Fa Hai  approached Xu Xian, warning him that there was  a demon in his house. The demon, he said, was Bai Su Zhen. Xu Xian laughed. His kindhearted, resourceful wife  was not a demon. Fa Hai insisted. He told Xu Xian to serve his wife realgar wine on the 5th day of the 5th month, when demons’ powers are weakest. If she wasn’t a demon, he explained,  it wouldn’t hurt her. Xu Xian dismissed the monk politely, with no intention of serving  Bai Su Zhen the wine. But as the day approached,  he decided to try it. As soon as the wine touched  Bai Su Zhen’s lips, she ran to the bedroom,  claiming she wasn’t feeling well. Xu Xian prepared some medicine  and went to check on her. But instead of his wife, he found a giant white serpent with a bloody forked tongue in the bed. He collapsed, killed by the shock. When Bai Su Zhen opened her eyes, she realized immediately what  must have happened. The truth was that Bai Su Zhen was  an immortal snake with formidable magical powers. She had used her powers to take a  human form and improve her and  her husband’s fortunes. Her magic couldn’t revive Xu Xian, but she had one more idea to save him: an herb that could grant longevity  and even bring the dead back to life, guarded by the Old Man of the South Pole in the forbidden peaks of the  Kun Lun Mountains. She rode to the mountains on a cloud, then continued on foot passed gateways  and arches until she reached one  marked “beyond mortals” hanging over a silver bridge. On the other side, two of the Old Man’s disciples  guarded the herb. Bai Su Zhen disguised herself as a monk and told them she’d come to invite  the Old Man to a gathering of the gods. While they relayed her message, she plucked some leaves  from the herb and ran. The servants realized they had been  tricked and chased her. Bai Su Zhen coughed up a magic ball  and threw it at one. As the other closed in on her, she put the herb under her tongue  for safekeeping, but its magic forced both of them  into their true forms. As the crane’s long beak  clamped around her, the Old Man appeared. Why, he asked, would she risk her life  to steal his herb when she was already immortal? Bai Su Zhen explained  her love for Xu Xian. Even if he didn’t want to be with her  now that he knew she was a demon, she was determined to  bring him back to life. The two had a karmic connection dating  back more than a thousand years. When Bai Su Zhen was a small snake, a beggar was about to kill her, but a kind passerby rescued her. Her rescuer was Xu Xian in a past life. Touched by her willingness  to risk her life for him, the Old Man permitted her to leave the  mountain with the immortal herb. Bai Su Zhen returned home  to revive Xu Xian. When he opened his eyes, the terrified look frozen on his face  became a smile. Demon or not, he was still happy to see his wife. 