This pond is the only home  this fish has ever known. But lately, it’s gotten crowded  and food is scarce. Luckily, it has an option many don’t: as a walking catfish, it can dance  its way out of the water and onto bigger and better things. However, it faces many challenges  on its terrestrial journey: it’s now in danger of suffocating,  drying up, suffering physical damage  from rough terrain, and being hunted by land predators. We think of fish  as completely aquatic animals. But the walking catfish is just one  of hundreds of fish species that are actually amphibious, meaning that they possess adaptations  that enable them to survive on land. Fish amphibiousness is a spectrum. At one end are species  like the mosquitofish that’ll only move on land when forced. And at the other end  are species like mudskippers that nonchalantly hop around mudflats  for days at a time. But why do fish make the exodus  from water to land? And how do they cope  with this drastic transition? If temperatures get too high  for the mangrove rivulus in the shallow tropical pools  it inhabits, it’ll flip itself onto a bank  and cool off in the shade. During the dry period, it can survive for two months  out of the water by staying in moist environments. Meanwhile, the eel catfish  makes its onshore voyage to satisfy its hearty craving for beetles. And for others, the terrestrial draw  is more ritualistic. Every year under the cover of night, masses of California grunion flop  their way onto sandy beaches, where females deposit thousands of eggs  into the sand before re-entering the ocean. Underwater, fish breathe with gills, which are feathery organs  packed with blood vessels that absorb dissolved oxygen  from the water. But in the open air, their gills collapse  and are rendered useless, so amphibious fishes need  other ways to breathe. The armored catfish’s stomach  is packed with blood vessels, so it can gulp down air  and breathe through its stomach lining. And lungfish, being related  to the ancestors of all tetrapods, or four-limbed vertebrates,  are equipped with true lungs. They’ll actually drown  if they’re kept underwater too long. Fish have thin, permeable skin  that allows for essential compounds to diffuse into and out of their bodies  while they’re underwater. But this works against them on land  as their bodily moisture diffuses into the air. To dodge dehydration, mudskippers  roll in the mud like puppies. But the lungfish takes the cake: the rivers it inhabits disappear  during dry seasons, so it buries itself in the earth and coats its body in a mucus cocoon. It can survive like this for years  until being resuscitated by the next big rainstorm. Amphibious fishes use powerful fins  to move on land and clever tools to navigate as they go. The Nopoli rock-climbing goby,  no bigger than a few centimeters, scales hundred-meter-tall  Hawaiian waterfalls, inching its way up by alternately  attaching the suction cups on its mouth and pelvic fins. To find water while on land,  the mummichog, like most amphibious fishes,  is on the lookout for reflective surfaces. Other species, like mosquitofish, exercise their inner ear to determine  where they’re oriented on a slope, relying on the probability that they’ll  find water by moving downhill. Our walking catfish, meanwhile, uses the taste buds that coat  its body for navigation. These taste buds are concentrated  in its whiskers, which whip through the air, sensing compounds that signal  the proximity and quality of nearby water— and prey. The walking catfish will shimmy towards  attractive volatile amino acids while steering clear of foul waters  emanating hydrogen sulfide. While amphibious fishes face a multitude  of new challenges upon leaving the water, they’ve evolved ingenious ways  to overcome them. They’re resilient in the face  of droughts and floods and have access to new prey  as well as a plan B if they need to escape competitive,  polluted, or unhealthy environments. While being a “fish out of water”  is generally regarded as a bad thing, for these species,  it offers an undisputed edge. 