Welcome to It Hurts! One of these creatures is thought  to possess the world’s most painful insect sting. If you were to guess, would it be: the ant that forages  in rainforest canopies? The bee that protects a hive of delectable honey? Or the wasp that paralyzes tarantulas? Let’s find out! Ant, bee, and wasp venoms contain  a variable cocktail of compounds designed to incite unsavory sensations  and even compromise bodily functions. Entomologist Justin O. Schmidt’s  sting pain index describes and ranks the pain  of around 100 kinds of insect stings. One of our three competitors claims the nastiest one. First, let’s consider  the Western honeybee’s sting, Schmidt says it’s like “a flaming  match head has landed on your arm and is quenched first with lye  and then sulfuric acid.” This discomfort is accomplished with venom that’s packed with a pain-causing  peptide called “melittin” and flesh-softening enzymes that disperse the venom. These enzymes may also cause  allergic reactions and even lead to fluid buildup  in the lungs. Because worker honeybees have barbed  stingers that burrow into certain victims, they usually can't sting without leaving part of their bodies behind, which ultimately kills them. Since only the queen bee has  the ability to reproduce, a worker bee’s self-sacrifice helps  ensure that the colony— and their genes— will prevail. But before they go, they release an alarm pheromone that activates a mass attack and often targets some of the most  vulnerable sites on their victim’s body. The tarantula hawk wasp sting is,  as Schmidt says, “blinding, fierce, shockingly electric ... A bolt out of the heavens. Lie down and scream.” The sensation might last just 5 agonizing minutes for humans, but it leaves tarantulas— the wasp’s preferred target— permanently paralyzed. After the wasp stings a tarantula,  aiming for a crucial bundle of nerves, it lays an egg on the immobilized spider. Once hatched, the wasp’s larva spends its formative days in the bountiful environment  of the tarantula’s body— devouring it alive. Aside from paralyzing the tarantula, the wasp’s sting doesn’t seem to do further harm. This functions to preserve the spider  as fresh meat for the wasp’s offspring. The rainforest-dwelling bullet ant’s sting yields “pure, intense, brilliant pain. Like walking over a flaming bed  of charcoal with a 3-inch nail embedded  in your heel,” according to Schmidt. And this torture often lasts more than 12 hours. A neurotoxic peptide called poneratoxin that our bodies struggle to degrade  is what makes the pain last so long. In addition to agony, poneratoxin can  induce trembling, cold sweats, nausea, vomiting,  and even an abnormal heartbeat. The bullet ant is, in fact, crowned  with the most painful insect sting. It's thought that they may have evolved such an excruciating defense because they forage in rainforest canopies loaded with predators looking for proteinaceous snacks. They can’t simply jump or fly away, so perhaps they’re better off with this reliable, rather off-putting weapon. The tarantula hawk wasp’s formidable sting clocks in as the second most painful  on the scale. And it’s likely the reason this wasp  has no known predators. Honeybee stings are in the middle  of the pain scale. But when many sting simultaneously, what might’ve felt manageable at first becomes all the more dangerous. In fact, insect stings helped enable the evolution of complex colonies that would otherwise represent an easy feast to predators. Some stinging insects are, of course, more aggressive than others, but most of the time, they only sting us  when we provoke them. The truth hurts. 