This is the tale of two ancient cities and the trees  that determined their destinies. In 3,000 BC Uruk was more densely  populated than modern day New York City. This crowded capital had to continually expand their irrigation system to feed its growing population. 2,500 years later in Sri Lanka, the city  of Anuradhapura had a similar problem. They were also growing constantly, and like Uruk, their city relied heavily  on an elaborate irrigation system. As Uruk grew, its farmers began chopping  down trees to make space for more crops. In Anuradhapura, however,  trees were sacred. Their city housed an offshoot  of the Bodhi tree under which Buddha himself  was said to have attained enlightenment. Religious reverence  slowed farmer’s axes and even led the city to plant  additional trees in urban parks. Initially, Uruk’s expansion worked well. But without trees to filter  their water supply, Uruk’s irrigation system  became contaminated. Evaporating water left mineral deposits, which rendered the soil  too salty for agriculture. Conversely, Anuradhapura’s  irrigation system was designed to work in concert with the surrounding forest. Their city eventually grew to more than  twice Uruk’s population, and today, Anuradhapura still cares  for a tree planted over 2,000 years ago. We may think of nature as being  unconnected to our urban spaces, but trees have always been  an essential part of successful cities. Trees act like a natural sponge,  absorbing storm water runoff before releasing it back  into the atmosphere. The webs of their roots protect against  mudslides while allowing soil to retain water  and filter out toxins. Roots help prevent floods, while reducing the need for storm  drains and water treatment plants. Their porous leaves purify the air  by trapping carbon and other pollutants, making them essential  in the fight against climate change. Humanity has been uncovering  these arboreal benefits for centuries. But trees aren’t just crucial  to the health of a city’s infrastructure; they play a vital role in the health  of its citizens as well. In the 1870’s, Manhattan had few trees  outside the island’s parks. Without trees to provide shade, buildings absorbed up to nine times  more solar radiation during deadly summer heat waves. Combined with the period’s  poor sanitation standards, the oppressive heat made the city a  breeding ground for bacteria like cholera. In modern day Hong Kong, tall skyscrapers and underground infrastructure make it difficult for trees to grow. This contributes to the city’s  dangerously poor air quality, which can cause bronchitis  and diminished lung function. Trees affect our mental health as well. Research indicates that the presence  of green foliage increases attention spans and decreases stress levels. It’s even been shown that hospital  patients with views of brick walls recover more slowly than  those with views of trees. Fortunately, many cities  are full of views like this— and that’s no accident. As early as the 18th century, city planners began to embrace  the importance of urban trees. In 1733, Colonel James Oglethorpe  planned the city of Savannah, Georgia to ensure that no neighborhood  was more than a 2-minute walk from a park. After World War II, Copenhagen directed  all new development along five arteries— each sandwiched between a park. This layout increased  the city’s resilience to pollution and natural disasters. And urban trees don’t just benefit people. Portland’s Forest Park preserves  the region’s natural biodiversity, making the city home to various  local plants, 112 bird species,  and 62 species of mammals. No city is more committed to trees  than Singapore. Since 1967, Singapore’s government has planted over 1.2 million trees, including those within 50-meter tall  vertical gardens called supertrees. These structures sustain themselves  and nearby conservatories with solar energy and collected rainwater. Trees and vegetation currently cover  over 50% of Singapore’s landmass, reducing the need for air conditioning and encouraging low-pollution  transportation. By 2050, it’s estimated that over 65% of the world will be living in cities. City planners can lay an eco-friendly foundation, but it’s up to the people who live  in these urban forests to make them homes for more than humans. 