Whether or not you realize it, as a surfer you’re a master  of complicated physics. The science of surfing begins as soon as you and your board  first hit the water. The board’s size and light construction  help it displace a lot of water. In turn, a buoyant force equal to the weight of the  displaced water pushes up, counteracting you and your board’s weight. This lets you stay afloat while  you wait to paddle for a wave. And what exactly are you waiting for? The perfect wave, of course. Like other waves in physics, ocean waves represent a transfer of energy. Wind blowing across the ocean accelerates  water particles near the surface, leading to the growth of ripples  that become waves. These deviations from the flat surface  are acted upon by gravity, which tries to restore the surface  to its original flat state. As the waves then move through the water, particles push and pull on their neighbors through the wave induced pressure, and this motion propagates energy through  the water in unison with the wave motion. The motion of these particles is much more limited than the  overall motion of the waves. Near the shore, the shallower seafloor constrains  the motion of the waves to occur in a more limited region  than out at sea, concentrating the wave energy  near the surface. If the topography of the shoreline  is even and smooth, this will refract the waves  to become more parallel to the shore as they approach. This is the crucial moment. As the wave gets near, you quickly pivot your board  in the same direction as the wave and paddle to match its speed. Your board forms an angle with the water, and this creates a dynamic pressure  on the bottom of it, forcing you and your board  out of the water, to skim along the surface. At the same time, your increased forward momentum  makes you more stable, allowing you to stand up  and surf along the wave. Now you’ve caught the wave, and are riding along its front  face parallel to the shoreline. Fins on the surfboard allow you to alter  your speed and direction by repositioning your weight. Above you is the wave’s crest, where the water particles are undergoing their greatest acceleration. That forces them to move faster  than the underlying wave, so they shoot ahead before falling under gravity’s influence. This forms the waves’ characteristic curls, or jets, as they break along the shore. Sometimes, the curl might completely  enclose part of the wave, forming a moving tube of water  known as the barrel. Because of irregularities in the seafloor  and the swell itself, few barrels last as long as the legendary  27-second ride off the coast of Namibia. But many who manage to get barreled have said they feel time  passing differently inside, making it one of the most magical  experiences a surfer can have. Of course, not all beaches are created equal. Offshore underwater canyons or rock formations in certain locations like Nazare, Portugal or Mavericks, California refract the incoming wave energy  into a single spot, creating massive waves  sought by surfers worldwide. And some of these waves travel  for more than a week, with swells originating more than 10,000  kilometers away from shore. Waves surfed in sunny California may have originated in the stormy  seas near New Zealand. So while you may not be thinking about  weather patterns in the South Pacific, tectonic geology, or fluid mechanics, the art of catching the perfect wave  relies on all these things and more. And the waves we surf, created by wind, are just one visible part of the  continuous oscillation of energy that has shaped our universe  since its very beginning. 