A mountain separating two lakes. A room papered  floor to ceiling with bridal satins. The lid of an immense snuffbox. These seemingly unrelated images  take us on a tour of a sperm whale’s head in Herman Melville’s "Moby Dick." On the surface, the book is the story of Captain Ahab’s  hunt for revenge against Moby Dick, the white whale who bit off his leg. But though the book features pirates, typhoons, high-speed chases, and giant squid, you shouldn’t expect a conventional  seafaring adventure. Instead, it’s a multilayered exploration  of not only the intimate details of life aboard a whaling ship, but also subjects from across  human and natural history, by turns playful and tragic,  humorous, and urgent. The narrator guiding us through  these explorations is a common sailor called Ishmael. Ishmael starts out telling his own story as he prepares to escape the “damp  and drizzly November in [his] soul” by going to sea. But after he befriends  the Pacific Islander Queequeg and joins Ahab’s crew aboard the Pequod, Ishmael becomes more  of an omniscient guide for the reader than a traditional character. While Ahab obsesses over revenge and first mate Starbuck  tries to reason with him, Ishmael takes us  on his own quest for meaning throughout “the whole universe,  not excluding its suburbs.” In his telling, life’s biggest questions  loom large, even in the smallest details. Like his narrator, Melville  was a restless and curious spirit, who gained an unorthodox education working as a sailor on a series of grueling voyages  around the world in his youth. He published "Moby Dick" in 1851, when the United States’  whaling industry was at its height. Nantucket, where the Pequod sets sail, was the epicenter of this lucrative  and bloody global industry which decimated the world’s  whale populations. Unusually for his time, Melville doesn’t shy away  from the ugly side of this industry, even taking the whale’s perspective  at one point, when he speculates on how terrifying  the huge shadows of the ships must be to the creature swimming below. The author’s first-hand familiarity  with whaling is evident over and over again in Ishmael’s vivid descriptions. In one chapter,  the skin of a whale’s penis becomes protective clothing  for a crewman. Chapters with titles as unpromising  as “Cistern and Buckets” become some of the novel’s  most rewarding as Ishmael compares bailing out  a sperm-whale’s head to midwifery, which leads to reflections on Plato. Tangling whale-lines provoke  witty reflections on the “ever-present perils”  entangling all mortals. He draws on diverse branches of knowledge, like zoology, gastronomy, law, economics, mythology, and teachings from a range  of religious and cultural traditions. The book experiments with writing style  as much as subject matter. In one monologue, Ahab challenges  Moby Dick in Shakespearean style: “Towards thee I roll, thou all-destroying  but unconquering whale; to the last I grapple with thee;  from hell’s heart I stab at thee; for hate’s sake I spit  my last breath at thee.” One chapter is written as a playscript, where members of the Pequod’s multi-ethnic crew chime in individually and in chorus. African and Spanish sailors trade insults  while a Tahitian seaman longs for home, Chinese and Portuguese crewmembers  call for a dance, and one young boy prophesies disaster. In another chapter, Ishmael sings the process  of decanting whale oil in epic style, as the ship pitches and rolls  in the midnight sea and the casks rumble like landslides. A book so wide-ranging  has something for everyone. Readers have found  religious and political allegory, existential enquiry,  social satire, economic analysis, and representations  of American imperialism, industrial relations and racial conflict. As Ishmael chases meaning  and Ahab chases the white whale, the book explores the opposing forces  of optimism and uncertainty, curiosity and fear that characterize  human existence no matter what it is we’re chasing. Through "Moby Dick’s" many pages, Melville invites his readers  to leap into the unknown, to join him on the hunt  for the “ungraspable phantom of life.” 