Over the course of our lifetimes, our bodies undergo a series  of extraordinary metamorphoses: we grow, experience puberty, and many of us reproduce. Behind the scenes, the endocrine system works  constantly to orchestrate these changes. Alongside growth and sexual maturity, this system regulates everything  from your sleep to the rhythm of your beating heart, exerting its influence over each  and every one of your cells. The endocrine system relies  on interactions between three features to do its job: glands, hormones, and trillions of cell receptors. Firstly, there are several hormone-producing glands: three in your brain, and seven in the rest of your body. Each is surrounded by  a network of blood vessels, from which they extract ingredients  to manufacture dozens of hormones. Those hormones are then pumped out in tiny amounts, usually into the bloodstream. From there, each hormone needs  to locate a set of target cells in order to bring about a specific change. To find its targets,  it’s helped along by receptors, which are special proteins inside  or on the cell’s surface. Those receptors recognise specific hormones as they waft by, and bind to them. When this happens, that hormone-receptor combination  triggers a range of effects that either increase or decrease  specific processes inside the cell to change the way that cell behaves. By exposing millions of cells at a time to hormones in carefully-regulated quantities, the endocrine system drives  large-scale changes across the body. Take, for instance, the thyroid  and the two hormones it produces, triiodothyronine and thyroxine. These hormones travel to most  of the body’s cells, where they influence how quickly  those cells use energy and how rapidly they work. In turn, that regulates everything  from breathing rate to heartbeat, body temperature, and digestion. Hormones also have some of their most visible—and familiar—effects during puberty. In men, puberty begins when  the testes start secreting testosterone. That triggers the gradual development  of the sexual organs, makes facial hair sprout, and causes the voice to deepen and height to increase. In women, estrogen secreted from the ovaries signals the start of adulthood. It helps the body develop, makes the hips widen, and thickens the womb’s lining, preparing the body  for menstruation or pregnancy. An enduring misconception around  the endocrine system is that there are exclusively male  and female hormones. In fact, men and women  have estrogen and testosterone, just in different amounts. Both hormones play a role  in pregnancy, as well, alongside more than 10 other hormones that ensure the growth of the fetus, enable birth, and help the mother feed her child. Such periods of hormonal change are also associated with fluctuations in mood. That’s because hormones can influence the production of certain chemicals  in the brain, like serotonin. When chemical levels shift, they may cause changes in mood, as well. But that’s not to say that hormones  have unlimited power over us. They’re frequently viewed as the main  drivers of our behavior, making us slaves to their effects, especially during puberty. But research shows that our behavior  is collectively shaped by a variety of influences, including the brain  and its neurotransmitters, our hormones, and various social factors. The primary function  of the endocrine system is to regulate our bodily processes,  not control us. Sometimes disease, stress, and even diet can disrupt  that regulatory function, however, altering the quantity of hormones  that glands secrete or changing the way that cells respond. Diabetes is one of the most  common hormonal disorders, occurring when the pancreas  secretes too little insulin, a hormone that manages blood sugar levels. And hypo- and hyperthyroidism occur when the thyroid gland makes too little or too much thyroid hormone. When there’s too little thyroid hormone, that results in a slowed heart rate, fatigue, and depression, and when there’s too much  thyroid hormone, weight loss, sleeplessness, and irritability. But most of the time, the endocrine system manages to keep  our bodies in a state of balance. And through its constant regulation, it drives the changes that ultimately help us become who we are. 