The body becomes its own corset. Past, present, and future  exist as a single force. A swing without gravity soars  to a terrifying height. The outlines of people and things  dissolve. Countless poets and writers  have tried to put words to the experience of a panic attack— a sensation so overwhelming, many people  mistake it for a heart attack, stroke, or other life-threatening crisis. Though panic attacks don’t cause  long-term physical harm, afterwards, the fear of another attack  can limit someone’s daily life— and cause more panic attacks. Studies suggest that almost a third of us will experience at least one  panic attack in our lives. And whether it’s your first,  your hundredth, or you’re witnessing someone else  go through one, no one wants to repeat the experience. Even learning about them can  be uncomfortable, but it’s necessary— because the first step to preventing  panic attacks is understanding them. At its core, a panic attack  is an overreaction to the body’s normal physiological response  to the perception of danger. This response starts with the amygdala, the brain region involved  in processing fear. When the amygdala perceives danger, it stimulates  the sympathetic nervous system, which triggers the release of adrenaline. Adrenaline prompts an increase  in the heart and breathing rate to get blood and oxygen  to the muscles of the arms and legs. This also sends oxygen to the brain,  making it more alert and responsive. During a panic attack, this response is exaggerated  well past what would be useful in a dangerous situation, causing a racing heart, heavy breathing,  or hyperventilation. The changes to blood flow  cause lightheadedness and numbness in the hands and feet. A panic attack usually peaks  within 10 minutes. Then, the prefrontal cortex  takes over from the amygdala and stimulates  the parasympathetic nervous system. This triggers the release of a hormone  called acetylcholine that decreases the heart rate  and gradually winds down the panic attack. In a panic attack, the body’s  perception of danger is enough to trigger the response we would have to a real threat— and then some. We don't know for sure  why this happens, but sometimes cues in the environment  that remind us of traumatic past experience  can trigger a panic attack. Panic attacks can be part  of anxiety disorders like PTSD, social anxiety disorder, OCD,  and generalized anxiety disorder. Recurring panic attacks,  frequent worry about new attacks, and behavioral changes  to avoid panic attacks can lead to a diagnosis  of a panic disorder. The two main treatments  for panic disorder are antidepressant medication  and cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT. Both have about a 40% response rate— though someone who responds to one  may not respond to the other. However, antidepressant medications  carry some side effects, and 50% of people relapse  when they stop taking them. CBT, meanwhile, is more lasting,  with only a 20% relapse rate. The goal of CBT treatment for panic  disorder is to help people learn and practice concrete tools  to exert physical, and in turn mental, control over the sensations and thoughts  associated with a panic attack. CBT begins with an explanation of the  physiological causes of a panic attack, followed by breath and muscle exercises  designed to help people consciously control breathing patterns. Next comes cognitive restructuring, which involves identifying  and changing the thoughts that are common during attacks— such as believing you’ll stop breathing,  have a heart attack, or die— and replacing them  with more accurate thoughts. The next stage of treatment is exposure  to the bodily sensations and situations that typically trigger a panic attack. The goal is to change the belief,  through experience, that these sensations and situations  are dangerous. Even after CBT, taking these steps  isn’t easy in the grip of an attack. But with practice, these tools  can both prevent and de-escalate attacks, and ultimately reduce the hold of panic  on a person’s life. Outside formal therapy, many panickers find relief from the same  beliefs CBT aims to instill: that fear can’t hurt you,  but holding on to it will escalate panic. Even if you’ve never had a panic attack, understanding them will help you identify  one in yourself or someone else— and recognizing them is the first step  in preventing them. 