In the 13th Century, Genghis Khan embarked on a mission to take over Eurasia, swiftly conquering countries and drawing  them into his expanding Mongol Empire. With his vast armies he became almost  unstoppable. But, legend has it that there was  one obstacle that even the impressive Khan couldn’t  overcome: A towering wall of ice, grown by locals across a mountain pass to stop the Khan’s armies from  invading their territory. No one knows how historically accurate  that particular story is, but remarkably, it draws on fact: For centuries, in the Karakoram  and Himalayan mountain ranges, people have been growing glaciers  and using these homemade bodies of ice as sources of drinking water and  irrigation for their crops. But before we get to that fascinating  phenomenon, it’s important to understand the  difference between glaciers that grow in the wild, and those that humans create. In the wild, glaciers require three conditions to grow: Snowfall, cold temperatures, and time. First, a great deal of snow falls and  accumulates. Cold temperatures then ensure that the  stacked up snow persists throughout the winter, spring,  summer, and fall. Over the following years, decades,  and centuries, the pressure of the accumulated snow transforms layers into highly compacted  glacial ice. Artificially growing a glacier, however, is completely different. At the confluence of three great  mountain ranges, the Himalayas, Karakoram, and Hindu Kush, some local cultures have believed for centuries that glaciers are alive. And what’s more, that certain glaciers can have different  genders including male and female. Local Glacier Growers ‘breed’ new glaciers by grafting together—or marrying— fragments of ice from male and  female glaciers, then covering them with charcoal,  wheat husks, cloths, or willow branches so they can reproduce. Under their protective coverings, these glacierets transform into fully  active glaciers that grow each year with  additional snowfall. Those then serve as lasting  reserves of water that farmers can use  to irrigate their crops. These practices have spread  to other cultures, where people are creating their own  versions of glaciers and applying them to solve serious  modern challenges around water supplies. Take Ladakh, a high-altitude desert region in northern India. It sits in the rain shadow of the  Himalayas and receives on average fewer than ten  centimeters of rain per year. As local glaciers shrink because  of climate change, regional water scarcity is increasing. And so, local people have started growing  their own glaciers as insurance against this uncertainty. These glaciers come in two types:  horizontal, and vertical. Horizontal glaciers are formed when  farmers redirect glacier meltwater into channels and pipes, then carefully siphon it off into a series of basins made from stones and earth. Villagers minutely control the release of  water into these reservoirs, waiting for each new layer to freeze before filling the basin  with another wave. In early spring, these frozen pools begin to melt, supplying villagers with  irrigation for their fields. Local people make vertical glaciers using  the meltwater from already-existing glaciers  high above their villages. The meltwater enters channels  that run downhill, flowing until it reaches a crop site where it bursts forth from a pipe pointing straight into the air. When winter temperatures dip, this water freezes as it arcs  out of the pipe, ultimately forming a 50 meter ice  sculpture called a stupa, shaped like an upside-down ice cream cone. This inverted form minimizes the amount of surface area it exposes to the sun in the spring and summer. That ensures that the mini-glacier  melts slowly and provides a reliable supply of water  to feed the farmers’ crops. These methods may be ancient, but they’re becoming more relevant as climate change takes its  toll on our planet. In fact, people are now growing their own glaciers in many regions beyond Ladakh. Swiss people, utilizing modern glacier  growing technology, created their first stupa in 2016  in the Swiss Alps. There are plans for over 100 more in  villages in Pakistan, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan. Perhaps one day we’ll be able to harness our homegrown glaciers well enough to build whole walls of ice– this time not for keeping people out, but to enable life in some of the planet’s harshest landscapes. 