Whether it’s being chained to a burning  wheel, turned into a spider, or having an eagle eat one’s liver, Greek mythology is filled  with stories of the gods inflicting gruesome horrors  on mortals who angered them. Yet one of their most famous  punishments is not remembered for its outrageous cruelty,  but for its disturbing familiarity. Sisyphus was the first king of Ephyra,  now known as Corinth. Although a clever ruler who made his city  prosperous, he was also a devious tyrant who seduced his niece and  killed visitors to show off his power. This violation of the sacred hospitality  tradition greatly angered the gods. But Sisyphus may still have  avoided punishment if it hadn’t been for his  reckless confidence. The trouble began when Zeus  kidnapped the nymph Aegina, carrying her away in the form  of a massive eagle. Aegina’s father, the river god Asopus,  pursued their trail to Ephyra, where he encountered Sisyphus. In exchange for the god making a spring inside the city, the king told Asopus which way  Zeus had taken the girl. When Zeus found out, he was so furious that he ordered Thanatos, or Death, to chain Sisyphus in the underworld  so he couldn’t cause any more problems. But Sisyphus lived up to  his crafty reputation. As he was about to be imprisoned, the king asked Thanatos to show him  how the chains worked – and quickly bound him instead,  before escaping back among the living. With Thanatos trapped, no one could die,  and the world was thrown into chaos. Things only returned to normal  when the god of war Ares, upset that battles were no longer fun,  freed Thanatos from his chains. Sisyphus knew his reckoning was at hand. But he had another trick up his sleeve. Before dying, he asked his wife Merope to throw his body in the public square, from where it eventually washed up on  the shores of the river Styx. Now back among the dead,  Sisyphus approached Persephone, queen of the Underworld, and complained that his wife had disrespected him  by not giving him a proper burial. Persephone granted him permission to go back to the land of living and punish Merope, on the condition that  he would return when he was done. Of course, Sisyphus refused  to keep his promise, now having twice escaped death by tricking the gods. There wouldn’t be a third time, as the messenger Hermes dragged Sisyphus back to Hades. The king had thought he was  more clever than the gods, but Zeus would have the last laugh. Sisyphus’s punishment was  a straightforward task – rolling a massive boulder up a hill. But just as he approached the top, the  rock would roll all the way back down, forcing him to start over …and over, and over, for all eternity. Historians have suggested that the tale  of Sisyphus may stem from ancient myths about the rising and setting sun,  or other natural cycles. But the vivid image of someone condemned  to endlessly repeat a futile task has resonated as an allegory  about the human condition. In his classic essay The Myth of Sisyphus, existentialist philosopher Albert Camus  compared the punishment to humanity’s futile search  for meaning and truth in a meaningless and  indifferent universe. Instead of despairing, Camus imagined  Sisyphus defiantly meeting his fate as he walks down the hill to begin  rolling the rock again. And even if the daily  struggles of our lives sometimes seem equally  repetitive and absurd, we still give them significance and value  by embracing them as our own. 