Juana Ramírez de Asbaje sat before a panel of prestigious theologians, jurists, and mathematicians. The viceroy of New Spain had invited them to test the young woman’s knowledge by posing the most difficult questions  they could muster. But Juana successfully answered  every challenge, from complicated equations to  philosophical queries. Observers would later liken the scene to “a royal galleon fending  off a few canoes.” The woman who faced this interrogation  was born in the mid-17th century. At that time, Mexico had been a Spanish  colony for over a century, leading to a complex and  stratified class system. Juana’s maternal grandparents  were born in Spain, making them members of Mexico’s  most esteemed class. But Juana was born out of wedlock, and her father – a Spanish military captain – left her mother, Doña Isabel,  to raise Juana and her sisters alone. Fortunately, her grandfather’s  moderate means ensured the family  a comfortable existence. And Doña Isabel set a strong example  for her daughters, successfully managing one of her father’s  two estates, despite her illiteracy and the  misogyny of the time. It was perhaps this precedent that  inspired Juana’s lifelong confidence. At age three, she secretly followed her  older sister to school. When she later learned that higher  education was open only to men, she begged her mother to let her attend in disguise. Her request denied, Juana found solace  in her grandfather’s private library. By early adolescence, she’d mastered  philosophical debate, Latin, and the Aztec language Nahuatl. Juana’s precocious intellect attracted  attention from the royal court in Mexico City, and when she was sixteen, the viceroy and his wife took her in  as their lady-in-waiting. Here, her plays and poems alternately  dazzled and outraged the court. Her provocative poem Foolish Men infamously criticized sexist  double standards, decrying how men corrupt women  while blaming them for immorality. Despite its controversy, her work still  inspired adoration, and numerous proposals. But Juana was more interested in knowledge than marriage. And in the patriarchal  society of the time, there was only one place  she could find it. The Church, while still under the zealous  influence of the Spanish Inquisition, would allow Juana to retain her  independence and respectability while remaining unmarried. At age 20, she entered the Hieronymite  Convent of Santa Paula and took on her new name:  Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz. For years, Sor Juana was considered a  prized treasure of the church. She wrote dramas, comedies, and treatises  on philosophy and mathematics, in addition to religious music and poetry. She accrued a massive library, and was visited by many  prominent scholars. While serving as the convent’s treasurer  and archivist, she also protected the livelihoods of her  niece and sisters from men who tried to exploit them. But her outspokenness ultimately brought her into conflict with her benefactors. In 1690, a bishop published Sor Juana’s  private critique of a respected sermon. In the publication, he admonished Sor Juana to devote herself  to prayer rather than debate. She replied that God would not have given women intellect if he did not want them to use it. The exchange caught the attention of the  conservative Archbishop of Mexico. Slowly, Sor Juana was stripped of her  prestige, forced to sell her books  and give up writing. Furious at this censorship, but unwilling to leave the church, she bitterly renewed her vows. In her last act of defiance, she signed  them “I, the worst of all,” in her own blood. Deprived of scholarship, Sor Juana threw  herself into charity work, and in 1695, she died of an illness she  contracted while nursing her sisters. Today, Sor Juana has been recognized  as the first feminist in the Americas. She’s the subject of countless  documentaries, novels, and operas, and appears on Mexico’s 200-peso banknote. In the words of Nobel laureate  Octavio Paz: “It is not enough to say that Sor Juana’s  work is a product of history; we must add that history is also  a product of her work.” 