Whether she’s describing  bickering families, quiet declarations of love, or juicy gossip, Jane Austen’s writing often feels as  though it was written just for you. Her dry wit and cheeky playfulness  informs her heroines, whose conversational tone welcomes readers with a conspiratorial wink. It’s even been said that some readers  feel like the author’s secret confidante, trading letters with their delightfully  wicked friend Jane. But this unique brand of  tongue-in-cheek humor is just one of the many feats found  in her sly satires of society, civility,  and sweeping romance. Written in the early nineteenth century, Austen's novels decode  the sheltered lives of the upper classes in rural England. From resentment couched in pleasantries to arguing that masks attraction, her work explores the bewildering  collision of emotions and etiquette. But while romance is a common  thread in her work, Austen dismissed the sentimental style  of writing so popular at the time. Instead of lofty love stories, her characters act naturally,  and often awkwardly. They trade pragmatic advice,  friendly jokes and not-so-friendly barbs  about their arrogant peers. As they grapple with the endless rules  of their society, Austen’s characters can usually find humor in all the hypocrisy, propriety,  and small talk. As Mr. Bennet jokes  to his favorite daughter, “For what do we live,  but to make sport for our neighbors and laugh at them in our turn?” And though her heroines might ridicule  senseless social mores, Austen fully understood the practical  importance of maintaining appearances. At the time she was writing, a wealthy marriage was a financial  necessity for most young women, and she often explores the tension between the mythical quest for love, and the economic benefits  of making a match. The savvy socialite Mary Crawford sums  this up in "Mansfield Park;" “I would have everybody marry  if they can do it properly: I do not like to have people  throw themselves away.” Unsurprisingly, these themes were also  present in Austen’s personal life. Born in 1775, she lived in the social circles  found in her novels. Jane's parents supported her education, and provided space for her to write  and publish her work anonymously. But writing was hardly lucrative work. And although she had sparks of chemistry, she never married. Elements of her circumstances can be found in many of her characters; often intelligent women with witty,  pragmatic personalities, and rich inner lives. These headstrong heroines provide  an entertaining anchor for their tumultuous romantic narratives. Like the irreverent Elizabeth Bennet  of "Pride and Prejudice," whose devotion to her sisters’ love lives  blinds her to a clumsy suitor. Or the iron-willed Anne Elliot  of "Persuasion," who chooses to remain unmarried  after the disappearance of her first love. And Elinor Dashwood, who fiercely protects her family  at the cost of her own desires in "Sense and Sensibility." These women all encounter  difficult choices about romantic, filial, and  financial stability, and they resolve them without  sacrificing their values– or their sense of humor. Of course, these characters  are far from perfect. They often think they have  all the answers. And by telling the story  from their perspective, Austen tricks the viewer into believing  their heroine knows best– only to pull the rug out from under  the protagonist and the reader. In "Emma," the titular character feels  surrounded by dull neighbors, and friends who can’t hope  to match her wit. As her guests prattle on and  on about nothing, the reader begins to agree– Emma is the only exciting character  in this quiet neighborhood. Yet despite her swelling ego, Emma may not be as in control  as she thinks – in life or love. And Austen’s intimate use of perspective makes these revelations doubly surprising, blindsiding both Emma and her audience. But rather than diminishing  her host of heroines, these flaws only confirm “the  inconsistency of all human characters.” Their complexity has kept Austen  prominent on stage and screen, and made her work easily adaptable  for modern sensibilities. So hopefully, new readers will continue  to find a friend in Ms. Austen for many years to come. 