Take a look at this image. What might this be? A frightening monster? Two friendly bears? Or something else entirely? For nearly a century, ten inkblots like these have been used as what seems like an almost  mystical personality test. Long kept confidential for psychologists  and their patients, the mysterious images were said to draw out the workings of a person’s mind. But what can inkblots really tell us, and how does this test work? Invented in the early 20th century  by Swiss psychiatrist Hermann Rorschach, the Rorschach Test is actually less about  the specific things we see, and more about our general approach  to perception. As an amateur artist Hermann was fascinated by how visual  perception varies from person to person. He carried this interest to  medical school, where he learned all our senses  are deeply connected. He studied how our process of perception  doesn’t just register sensory inputs, but transforms them. And when he started working at a  mental hospital in eastern Switzerland, he began designing a series  of puzzling images to gain new insight into this  enigmatic process. Using his inkblot paintings, Rorschach began quizzing hundreds  of healthy subjects and psychiatric patients with  the same question: what might this be? However, it wasn’t what the test subjects  saw that was most important to Rorschach, but rather, how they approached the task. Which parts of the image did they  focus on or ignore? Did they see the image moving? Did the color on some inkblots help them  give better answers, or distract and overwhelm them? He developed a system to code  people’s responses, reducing the wide range of interpretations to a few manageable numbers. Now he had empirical measures to quantify  all kinds of test takers: the creative and imaginative, the detail-oriented, the  big-picture perceivers, and flexible participants able  to adapt their approach. Some people would get stuck, offering the same answer  for multiple blots. Others gave unusual and  delightful descriptions. Responses were as varied as the inkblots, which offered different kinds of  perceptual problems– some easier to interpret than others. But analyzing the test-taker’s  overall approach yielded real insights into  their psychology. And as Rorschach tested more  and more people, patterns began to pile up. Healthy subjects with the same  personalities often took remarkably similar approaches. Patients suffering from the same  mental illnesses also performed similarly, making the test a reliable  diagnostic tool. It could even diagnose some conditions difficult to pinpoint with other  available methods. In 1921, Rorschach published his coding system  alongside the ten blots he felt gave the most nuanced picture of people’s perceptual approach. Over the next several decades, the test became wildly popular in  countries around the world. By the 1960s, it had been officially administered  millions of times in the U.S. alone. Unfortunately, less than a year after  publishing the test, Hermann Rorschach had died suddenly. Without its inventor to keep it on track, the test he had methodically gathered  so much data to support began to be used in all sorts  of speculative ways. Researchers gave the test  to Nazi war criminals, hoping to unlock the psychological roots  of mass murder. Anthropologists showed the images to  remote communities as a sort of universal personality test. Employers made prejudiced hiring decisions based on reductive decoding charts. As the test left clinics and entered  popular culture its reputation among medical  professionals plummeted, and the blots began to fall  out of clinical use. Today, the test is still controversial, and many people assume  it has been disproven. But a massive 2013 review of all the  existing Rorschach research showed that when administered properly  the test yields valid results, which can help diagnose mental illness or round out a patient’s  psychological profile. It’s hardly a stand-alone key  to the human mind– no test is. But its visual approach and lack  of any single right answer continue to help psychologists paint a more nuanced picture of how people see the world. Bringing us one step closer to understanding the patterns  behind our perceptions. 