You’re on an airplane  when you feel a sudden jolt. Outside your window nothing  seems to be happening, yet the plane continues to rattle  you and your fellow passengers as it passes through turbulent air in the atmosphere. Although it may not comfort  you to hear it, this phenomenon is one of the  prevailing mysteries of physics. After more than a century  of studying turbulence, we’ve only come up with a few  answers for how it works and affects the world around us. And yet, turbulence is ubiquitous, springing up in virtually any system  that has moving fluids. That includes the airflow  in your respiratory tract. The blood moving through your arteries. And the coffee in your cup,  as you stir it. Clouds are governed by turbulence, as are waves crashing along the shore  and the gusts of plasma in our sun. Understanding precisely how this  phenomenon works would have a bearing on so many  aspects of our lives. Here’s what we do know. Liquids and gases usually have  two types of motion: a laminar flow, which is stable  and smooth; and a turbulent flow, which is composed  of seemingly unorganized swirls. Imagine an incense stick. The laminar flow of unruffled smoke  at the base is steady and easy to predict. Closer to the top, however, the smoke accelerates, becomes unstable, and the pattern of movement changes to something chaotic. That’s turbulence in action, and turbulent flows have certain characteristics in common. Firstly, turbulence is always chaotic. That’s different from being random. Rather, this means that turbulence  is very sensitive to disruptions. A little nudge one way or the other will eventually turn into  completely different results. That makes it nearly impossible  to predict what will happen, even with a lot of information  about the current state of a system. Another important characteristic of  turbulence is the different scales of motion  that these flows display. Turbulent flows have many  differently-sized whirls called eddies, which are like vortices of  different sizes and shapes. All those differently-sized eddies  interact with each other, breaking up to become smaller and smaller until all that movement is  transformed into heat, in a process called the “energy cascade." So that’s how we recognize turbulence– but why does it happen? In every flowing liquid or gas there  are two opposing forces: inertia and viscosity. Inertia is the tendency of fluids  to keep moving, which causes instability. Viscosity works against disruption, making the flow laminar instead. In thick fluids such as honey, viscosity almost always wins. Less viscous substances like water or air  are more prone to inertia, which creates instabilities that  develop into turbulence. We measure where a flow falls  on that spectrum with something called the Reynolds number, which is the ratio between a flow’s  inertia and its viscosity. The higher the Reynolds number, the more likely it is that  turbulence will occur. Honey being poured into a cup,  for example, has a Reynolds number of about 1. The same set up with water has a Reynolds  number that’s closer to 10,000. The Reynolds number is useful for  understanding simple scenarios, but it’s ineffective in many situations. For example, the motion of the atmosphere is significantly influenced by factors including gravity and the  earth’s rotation. Or take relatively simple things  like the drag on buildings and cars. We can model those thanks to many  experiments and empirical evidence. But physicists want to be able to predict  them through physical laws and equations as well as we can model the orbits  of planets or electromagnetic fields. Most scientists think that getting there  will rely on statistics and increased computing power. Extremely high-speed computer simulations  of turbulent flows could help us identify patterns that could lead to a theory that organizes and unifies predictions across different situations. Other scientists think that the phenomenon is so complex that such a full-fledged theory  isn’t ever going to be possible. Hopefully we’ll reach a breakthrough, because a true understanding of turbulence could have huge positive impacts. That would include more  efficient wind farms; the ability to better prepare for  catastrophic weather events; or even the power to manipulate  hurricanes away. And, of course, smoother rides  for millions of airline passengers. 