This is Mabel. Mabel is an aphid, a small insect  in the same order as cicadas, stink bugs, and bed bugs. All these bugs pierce their prey  and suck out vital fluids. Aphids’ prey are plants. And what aphids are after  is buried within the plant, flowing in tubes made from single cells  strung end-to-end. These are called sieve tubes and together  they form the plumbing system for a plant’s most valuable resource: sap. Sap is mostly water and sugar. Some species’ sap has as much sugar  per liter as a can of soda. Photosynthesis is constantly  producing sugar. You can think of it as a chemical “pump”  which generates incredibly high pressure— up to 9 times that of a car tire—  in the sieve tubes. To feed, Mabel uses her stylet, which is a long, flexible needle. She slowly worms it into the tissue,  between the plant’s cells, until she pierces  one of those sieve tubes. Because the sap  is under so much pressure, Mabel doesn’t even have to suck it out  of the plant. She just opens a valve in her head  and lets the pressure push the sap through her digestive system. We’ll come back to what comes out  of her butt, but for now, you should know that plants don’t want  to be punctured and sipped. So they try to defend themselves. One defense is the sap itself. To see how that works, let’s  hypothetically hook up some other insect’s digestive tract  to a steady stream of sap. When that sap touches the insect’s cells,  its high sugar content encourages the water in the cells  to come out by osmosis… exactly like salt encourages water  to come out of a slug. The more sap that passes through  the insect, the more water it loses. Eventually, it shrivels up and dies. Mabel’s gut, however, is packed  with an enzyme called sucrase, which takes two molecules of sucrose  and converts them into one molecule of fructose and one of…  this three-unit sugar. Mabel burns the fructose for energy,  leaving the three-unit-sugar behind. Now, how does that help her? The more molecules of sugar  that are dissolved in the sap, the more water it can suck out  of Mabel’s cells. By reducing the number of molecules  of sugar in the sap, Mabel reduces its ability to suck water  out of her cells. Plant sap neutralized. Now that means Mabel can feed for days,  getting all the energy she needs to reproduce. Some aphid species  have an incredible life cycle. For example, the green peach aphid. During the fall, males and females mate,  and the females lay eggs. But in the spring, when the eggs hatch,  all the nymphs that emerge are female. When those females reach maturity,  they don’t lay eggs. Instead, they give birth to live young…  that are clones of themselves… and already pregnant…  with their own clones. So, these female aphids have  two generations of baby aphid clones forming inside themselves  at the same time. Scientists call this  telescopic development. That means that aphids can make  more of themselves fast— there can be 20 generations  within a single season— and that means lots of aphid poop. Mabel can poop her entire body weight  every two hours, making her one of the most prolific  poopers on the planet. Some aphid populations can produce  hundreds of kilograms of poop per acre. Now, aphid poop is not like your poop. Chemically, it’s not all that different  from sap; it’s a clear and colorless sweet,  syrupy liquid. You might already know it  by a different name: honeydew. Other species love honeydew. Some species of ants love it so much  they sort of herd and defend entire aphid colonies. In return, the ants get a steady supply  of sweet honeydew, which they can drink directly  from the aphids’ butts. Bottom’s up! Humans love honeydew, too. Several Native American tribes  used to harvest it from tall reeds and make it into cake. And some species of bee make honey  from honeydew, which humans then harvest and eat. So plants make the sap,  which is eaten and pooped out by aphids, regurgitated by bees,  harvested by humans, and dolloped into a cup of Earl Grey tea. 