Over the course of the 1960s, the FBI amassed almost  two thousand documents in an investigation into one  of America’s most celebrated minds. The subject of this inquiry  was a writer named James Baldwin. At the time, the FBI investigated many  artists and thinkers, but most of their files were a  fraction the size of Baldwin’s. During the years when the FBI hounded him, he became one of the best-selling black authors in the world. So what made James Baldwin loom  so large in the imaginations of both the public and the authorities? Born in Harlem in 1924, he was the oldest of nine children. At age fourteen, he began to work as a preacher. By delivering sermons, he developed his voice as a writer, but also grew conflicted about the Church’s stance on racial inequality and homosexuality. After high school, he began writing novels and essays while taking a series of odd jobs. But the issues that had driven him  away from the Church were still inescapable in his daily life. Constantly confronted with racism  and homophobia, he was angry and disillusioned,  and yearned for a less restricted life. So in 1948,  at the age of 24, he moved to Paris on a writing fellowship. From France, he published his first novel, "Go Tell it on the Mountain," in 1953. Set in Harlem, the book explores the Church  as a source of both repression and hope. It was popular with both black  and white readers. As he earned acclaim for his fiction, Baldwin gathered his thoughts on race,  class, culture and exile in his 1955 extended essay,  "Notes of a Native Son." Meanwhile, the Civil Rights movement  was gaining momentum in America. Black Americans were making incremental  gains at registering to vote and voting, but were still denied basic dignities in  schools, on buses, in the work force, and in the armed services. Though he lived primarily in France  for the rest of his life, Baldwin was deeply invested in  the movement, and keenly aware of his  country’s unfulfilled promise. He had seen family, friends,  and neighbors spiral into addiction, incarceration and suicide. He believed their fates originated  from the constraints of a segregated society. In 1963, he published "The Fire Next Time," an arresting portrait of racial strife in which he held white America  accountable, but he also went further, arguing that racism hurt white people too. In his view, everyone was inextricably enmeshed  in the same social fabric. He had long believed that: “People are trapped in history  and history is trapped in them.” Baldwin’s role in the Civil Rights  movement went beyond observing and reporting. He also traveled through the  American South attending rallies giving lectures  of his own. He debated both white politicians  and black activists, including Malcolm X, and served as a liaison between black  activists and intellectuals and white establishment leaders  like Robert Kennedy. Because of Baldwin’s unique ability to articulate the causes  of social turbulence in a way that white audiences  were willing to hear, Kennedy and others tended to see  him as an ambassador for black Americans — a label Baldwin rejected. And at the same time, his faculty with words led the  FBI to view him as a threat. Even within the Civil Rights movement, Baldwin could sometimes feel  like an outsider for his choice to live abroad, as well as his sexuality, which he explored openly  in his writing at a time when homophobia ran rampant. Throughout his life, Baldwin considered it his role to bear witness. Unlike many of his peers, he lived to see some of the victories of the Civil Rights movement, but the continuing racial inequalities in  the United States weighed heavily on him. Though he may have felt trapped  in his moment in history, his words have made generations  of people feel known, while guiding them toward a more  nuanced understanding of society’s most complex issues. 