Your interstellar police squad has tracked a group of dangerous rebels to a cluster of of seven small planets. Now you must apprehend them quickly  before their reinforcements arrive. Of course, the rebels won’t just stay put. They’ll try to dodge you by moving from planet to planet. But you have one major advantage. Every hour, your state-of-the-art cruiser  can warp between any two planets, while their beat-up smuggling ship can only jump to an adjacent planet  in that same time. These rebels don’t like to stay put. Every time they can relocate, they will. Your scouts tell you that the approaching rebel fleet is 10 hours away. You can’t risk letting the rebels escape. Can you devise a sequence  for searching the planets that’s guaranteed to catch them  in 10 warps or less, no matter what moves they make? Rounding up the rebels won’t be easy. For one, you have no way of knowing which  planet they’re on to begin with. And without that information, it’s hard  to determine where they’ll move next. So where do you begin? When tackling problems of this kind  it often helps to simplify things, so you can better understand  their dynamics. Let’s imagine that this cluster  has the same arrangement but no outermost planets, leaving only the four in the center. We still don’t know which planet  the rebels start on. But there’s one key feature: the third planet  is adjacent to all others, which means the rebels either start there  and move somewhere else, or start on one of the other planets and have no choice  but to move to planet three. Simply checking planet three twice in a row would do the trick. Adding the three outer planet  adds a bit more complexity, but the same strategy remains. We want to check the planets in an order  that will eventually corner the rebels. And there’s another insight  that can help us: each hour, the rebels move from  an even-numbered planet to an odd-numbered planet, or vice versa. This gives us a way  to simplify the problem by dividing the planets into two subsets, and tackling each one separately. For starters, let’s assume the rebels  begin on an even-numbered planet: either two, four, or six. So we’ll search planet two first. If they’re not there, they must have  started on either four or six. which means they can move to three, five, or seven. Planet three at the center gives them  the most options for their next move, so we’ll want to check there next. If we don’t find them, they must have been at planet five or seven, meaning they’ll next move to four or six. Let’s now search planet four. If they’re not there, they must have gone  to the sixth planet and can only flee to three or seven. If we next scour planet three  and don’t find them, we know they went to planet seven  and are now cornered. They can only move to planet six, where we’ll apprehend them on our fifth search. Of course, this plan only works assuming that the rebels were on  an even-numbered planet in the first hour. But what if that assumption was wrong? In that case, they must’ve started  on an odd-numbered planet. And because they move to an adjacent  planet every hour, their location must alternate between odd and even-numbered planets. This means that if they were on  an odd-numbered planet to start, after five moves, they'd be  on an even-numbered planet. So if our first five searches missed them because our assumption that they started  on an even-numbered planet was wrong, all we have to do now  is repeat the sequence! Searching the planets in order two, three, four, three, six, two, three, four, three, six, leaves the rebels nowhere to run. Thanks to your deductive reasoning,  order is restored to the galaxy. 